
EDITOR'S SPECIAL
Resilient societies
2024 / ISSUE 2
EUSPA
EO and GNSS
Market Repor t
2
More information on the European Union is available on the Internet (http://europa.eu).
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2024
ISBN 978-92-9206-079-4
ISSN 2811-9673
doi: 10.2878/73092
Copyright © European Union Agency for the Space Programme (EUSPA), 2024.
This document and the information contained in it is subject to applicable copyright and other intellectual property rights under the laws of the Czech Republic and other states. This document and information
contained in this document may be excerpted, copied, printed, republished, made available to the public by wire or wireless means and/ or otherwise provided to third parties only under the condition that the
source and copyright owner is clearly stated as follows: “Source: EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report, Issue 2, copyright © European Union Agency for the Space Programme, 2024”. If you do republish we would
be grateful if you link back to the EUSPA website www.euspa.europa.eu. No part of this document, including any part of the information contained therein, in whichever format, whether digital or otherwise,
may be altered, edited or changed without prior express and written permission of the European Union Agency for the Space Programme, to be requested via https://www.euspa.europa.eu/about/contact, clearly
stating the element (document and/or information) and term of use requested. For reproduction or use of photos and any other artistic material, permission may have to be directly obtained from the copyright
holder.
The designations employed, the representation of the materials and the views expressed by authors, editors, or expert groups, other EU agencies and/or their staff members or other third parties, do not
necessarily represent the opinions or the stated policy of either EUSPA or the European Union. The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed
or recommended by the EUSPA in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products and copyright holders are distinguished by
initial capital letters.
The present document is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either express or implied in relation to its content and/or use. To the extent permitted by the applicable law, the EUSPA shall not be
liable for any damages arising from the content and use of the present document. Should you become aware of any breach of the above terms of use, please notify the European Union Agency for the Space
Programme immediately, through the above-mentioned contact site. Any breach of these terms of use may be subject to legal proceedings, seeking monetary damages and/or an injunction to stop the unlawful
use of the document and/or any information contained therein. The above terms of use shall be governed by the EU law and the national substantive law of Belgium. The courts of Brussels shall have jurisdiction
to give judgement for any claims arising out of these terms of use. By downloading, forwarding, and/or copying this document or any parts thereof, in whichever format, whether digital or otherwise, the user
acknowledges and accepts the above terms of use as applicable to him/her.
On the cover: Walcheren, Zeeland, The Netherlands. Contains modified Copernicus Sentinel data (2023), processed by EUSPA.
2024 / ISSUE 2
EUSPA
EO and GNSS
Market Repor t
4
EU SPACE PROGRAMME
GALILEO AND EGNOS
The European Global Navigation Satellite System (EGNSS) allows users with compatible devices to
determine their position, velocity and time by processing signals from satellites. It consists of two
elements: Galileo; and the European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service (EGNOS).
Galileo is the first Global Satellite Navigation System (GNSS) designed specifically for civilian purposes,
which can be used by a variety of public and private actors worldwide. It provides Europe with
independence from the other GNSSs but remains interoperable with them, in order to facilitate GNSS
combined use and offer better performance.
EGNOS is Europe's regional Satellite-Based Augmentation System (SBAS). It improves the quality of
open signals from the US Global Positioning System (GPS) and (soon) Galileo.
GOVSATCOM AND IRIS²
The EU GOVernmental SATellite COMmunication (GOVSATCOM) programme aims to ensure the long-
term availability of reliable, secure, resilient and cost-effective satellite communication services for EU
and national public authorities. The needs of targeted authorities include the management of emergency
and security-critical missions, operations and infrastructures. These also include defence and public
safety-related operations, as well as diplomatic communication.
The added value of GOVSATCOM is that it avoids the duplication of efforts between European Union
Member States, thus overcoming the existing fragmentation of the secure SATCOM market.
A recent addition to the secured SATCOM* component of the EU Space Programme is the IRIS² initiative.
IRIS² aims to further enhance EU satellite-based connectivity, to integrate and expand the GOVSATCOM
portfolio and to offer additional services to both authorised government users and commercial users.
COPERNICUS
Coordinated and managed by the European Commission, Copernicus is the European Union’s Earth
Observation (EO) and monitoring programme.
Copernicus relies on its own set of satellites (Sentinels), as well as contributing missions (existing
commercial and public satellites), and a variety of technologies and in-situ measurements systems
at atmosphere, land and ocean. The accurate and reliable data generated is turned into value-added
information by the Copernicus Services for different thematic domains: atmosphere monitoring; marine
environment monitoring; land monitoring; climate change monitoring; and security and emergency
management.
Most data generated by Copernicus are made available to anyone globally based on a Full, Free and
Open (FFO) data policy. They are accessible through various services, including a set of cloud-based
platforms called Data and Information Access Services (DIAS).
SPACE SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
Space Situational Awareness (SSA) adopts a holistic approach toward supporting Europe’s independent
utilisation of and access to space, based on acquiring a comprehensive knowledge and understanding of
space hazards, including collisions between space objects, fragmentation and re-entry of space objects
into the atmosphere, space weather and near-Earth objects. SSA covers:
• Space Surveillance and Tracking (SST): a system of sensors and capabilities to survey and track
space objects;
• Near-Earth Objects (NEO): capabilities to monitor the risk of natural space objects approaching the
Earth; and
• Space Weather Events (SWE): capabilities to monitor space weather and solar activity.
Linked to SSA, Space Traffic Management (STM) encompasses the means and rules to access, conduct
activities in, and return from outer space safely, sustainably and securely. To perform STM activities, it is
necessary to observe space traffic continuously. EU Space Surveillance and Tracking (EU SST), with its
network of sensors and capabilities, constitutes the operational pillar of the EU STM approach.
The EU Space Programme: several components delivering
a wealth of services to citizens and institutions
* Since this report focuses on the EO and GNSS market, the markets of SSA, GOVSATCOM and IRIS 2 are not presented in this report. A focus on the Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report can be found on page 24.
5EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
FOREWORD
Dear Reader,
As the go-to-source for all things related to the EU Space Programme, EUSPA has a well-earned reputation for being a trusted provider of insightful information and expertise
that policymakers, entrepreneurs and major corporations can rely on.
Our ever-growing library of publications includes such titles as the
GNSS User Technology Report, the
GNSS Investment Report, the
EU Space for Green Transformation
Report and the recently released
Secure SATCOM Market and
User Technology Report.
One title stands out on the EUSPA shelf: The EO and GNSS Market Report.
Published every two years, this flagship report is the most established reference document for information on the global Earth Observation and GNSS markets and I am thrilled
to introduce our latest edition.
This new issue offers a comprehensive analytical overview of key GNSS and EO market segment trends and in-depth forecasts on how the market will evolve.
In the following pages you’ll see how the GNSS and EO downstream market continues to grow and, with it, the EU’s downstream sector. You will also learn that GNSS and EO
combined global revenues are set to increase from more than €260 billion in 2023 to nearly €590 billion by 2033. Furthermore, it’s worth noting that cumulative global GNSS
downstream market revenues over the 2023 to 2033 period are expected to surpass €4.5 trillion.
As always, much of this information and data is presented via an array of insightful charts, graphs and case studies.
Beyond looking at the global market, the Report examines what’s happening within 15 key market segments, most of which are synergetic by nature in that they include a balanced use of both EO and GNSS.
We’ve also included a dedicated section on the main cross-segment market trends for EO and GNSS.
This year’s Editor’s Special explores how EU Space, particularly EGNSS and Copernicus, contribute to the building of a more resilient society – a timely topic considering today’s global context of rapid technological
advancement, climate-related changes and ongoing geopolitical tensions.
While challenges like these may look like lemons, I think they could be opportunities to make lemonade. In fact, one of the key takeaways from this report is how many of today’s most pressing challenges represent
a real opportunity for Europe – an opportunity to leverage the power of EO and GNSS to develop the innovative solutions that will have positive impact on society and define our collective future.
Rodrigo da Costa
Executive Director
European Union Agency for the Space Programme (EUSPA)
January 2024
6
The European Union Agency for the Space Programme (EUSPA) and the European Commission (EC) welcome all readers to the second
issue of the EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report, which provides global coverage of the Earth Observation and Global Navigation
Satellite System applications across multiple market segments.
For those readers that are new to the report, the EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report is a continuously evolving publication that builds
on a similar structure and format used for the previous issue, covering 15 market segments.
The 15 market segments are the following: Agriculture / Aviation and Drones / Climate, Environment and Biodiversity / Consumer
Solutions, Tourism and Health / Emergency Management and Humanitarian Aid / Energy and Raw Materials / Fisheries and
Aquaculture / Forestry / Infrastructure / Insurance and Finance / Maritime and Inland Waterways / Rail / Road and Automotive /
Space / Urban Development and Cultural Heritage.
The report is structured as follows:
• A general overview of the EO and GNSS market that covers the downstream space application market, the role of EO and GNSS
in the different segments, market size and revenues of both EO and GNSS (as well as shipments and installed base in the case of
GNSS). It further includes a global industry overview, as well as a general description of Copernicus and EGNSS. Finally, it presents
overarching market drivers and EO- and GNSS-specific market trends.
• The market segments form the core of the report. All segments, regardless of length, follow a common structure:
✓ An overview of the EO and GNSS applications, alongside a segment description, to introduce the segment;
✓ Key market segment trends illustrated with examples;
✓ A user perspective that focuses on user needs and the utilisation of EO and GNSS in the segment;
✓ The industry value chains including a non-exhaustive list of key stakeholders;
✓ Recent developments, featuring market data on historical shipments or installed base of GNSS devices and EO data and service
revenues by application or region over the past decade, complemented by initiatives and examples that have recently been
implemented;
✓ Future market evolution including GNSS shipment and EO revenue forecasts for the coming decade to 2033. It presents ideas
and concepts whose outputs will impact the market in the mid-term and highlights promising applications that might boost the
future growth of the segment;
✓ European systems and projects covering the current use of Galileo, EGNOS and Copernicus services and associated relevant
projects within the specific segment; and
✓ Reference charts that show a forecast of the installed base and revenues of the market segment by region and application.
• In this issue the Editor's special introduces the topic ‘Resilient Societies’, which refers to all (non-military) activities aimed at
safeguarding people, their possessions, the environment, the economy and the organisation of our societies against hostile or rogue
actors, as well as managing other threats, risks and hazards that could imperil life or belongings. Through several use cases is
demonstrated how EO and GNSS contributes to those activities.
• Annexes conclude the report with a description of the methodology behind the data presented (Annex 1), a definition of key
performance parameters (Annex 2), a list of application descriptions (Annex 3), a list of acronyms (Annex 4) and information about
the authors (Annex 5).
How to read this report
HOW TO READ
7EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
TABLE OF CONTENTS
FOREWORD 5
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 8
MARKET OVERVIEW 9
MARKET SEGMENTS 34
AGRICULTURE 34
AVIATION AND DRONES 43
CLIMATE, ENVIRONMENT AND BIODIVERSITY 54
CONSUMER SOLUTIONS, TOURISM AND HEALTH 69
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND HUMANITARIAN AID 82
ENERGY AND RAW MATERIALS 92
FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE 106
FORESTRY 115
INFRASTRUCTURE 123
INSURANCE AND FINANCE 136
MARITIME AND INLAND WATERWAYS 146
RAIL 155
ROAD AND AUTOMOTIVE 164
SPACE 174
URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND CULTURAL HERITAGE 182
EDITOR’S SPECIAL – RESILIENT SOCIETIES 194
ANNEXES 199
8
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The global GNSS downstream market revenues,
generated by both the device sales and the added-
value services supported by such devices, will enjoy a
growing trend, from €260 billion in 2023 to around
€580 billion in 2033.
The market for the devices, expected to grow from
around €70 billion in 2023 to almost €120 billion in
2033, will progressively become more mature in the long term, while the added-value service market
will experience rapid growth thanks to continuous innovation: revenues are foreseen to soar from
around €190 billion in 2023 to more than €460 billion in 2033.
The annual shipments of GNSS devices are
forecasted to rise from 1.6 billion units in
2023 to 2.2 billion units in 2033, with the two
dominating segments: Consumer Solutions (such
as smartphones, fitness devices and tablets)
and Road and Automotive (including in-vehicle
systems and several types of on-board units),
accounting together for the majority of the shipments by 2033.
While the market is becoming mature, the stock of GNSS devices installed worldwide will continue
to grow. In particular, the installed base of GNSS devices is forecast to reach almost 9 billion units by
2033, with a slowdown vis-à-vis previous forecasts, connected to the increasing market maturity of
mass-market applications.
While mass-market segments will also dominate
revenues, a significant contribution to the value of the
market will also be provided by professional market
segments including Agriculture, Urban Development
And Cultural Heritage, and Infrastructure.
From a regional perspective, demand will continue
to be driven by economic and demographic growth
in Asia-Pacific, with the region accounting for a growing share of the total revenues – up to around
45% in 2033. The established markets of North America and Europe (including both EU27 and non-
EU27) will experience a relative decline in terms of global shares even though revenues will grow in
absolute numbers, while the markets of South America & Caribbean, and the Middle East & Africa will
grow in both value and share of total revenues.
Looking to the supply side, GNSS revenues are predominantly concentrated among companies
based in the United States (around 30%) and in Europe (around 25%). Chinese, Japanese and Korean
companies also retain a significant share of the market.
Driven by the critical importance of improving the
sustainability of human activity, improved service
offering and increasing awareness on the potential use
and added value of EO information, the EO market is
expected to continue to grow rapidly from €3.4 billion
in 2023 to almost €6 billion in 2033, including both
data revenues and value-added service revenues.
The rise of the EO application market is expected to
be fueled by added-value services, which represent
the largest market, with revenues estimated to account
for €2.8 billion in 2023 and expected to grow to
almost €5 billion by 2033, experiencing a CAGR of
6%. Revenues from EO data sales amounted to around
€600 million in 2023 and are set to increase to almost €1 billion in 2033.
Currently, nearly half of the revenues are generated by the top three segments: Climate,
Environment and Biodiversity; Agriculture; and Urban Development and Cultural Heritage. The
Insurance and Finance segment will grow to become the leading contributor to global EO
revenues, reaching almost €900 million in 2033.
In 2023, looking to the geographical distribution of the demand, EO revenues have been generated
primarily in North America (accounting for almost 50% of the value of sales), followed by Europe
(above 20% including EU and non-EU countries) and Asia-Pacific, accounts for slightly less than
20%. In the future, it is expected that revenues in both Europe and Asia will grow faster than in
North America, leading to a more balanced geographical distribution of sales in 2033.
Focusing on the supply side of the market, North
America leads, with Europe chasing as close second.
the EO value chain can be segmented along three
stages: data acquisition and distribution, where
North American companies lead with 50% of
revenues, data processing, in which again North
American suppliers dominate the market with around
55% of global sales, and analysis, insights & decision
support.
In this last stage of the value chain, the European industry is leading, represented mostly by small
and medium-size companies.
GNSS global revenues will rise
from more than €260 billion in
2023 to around €580 billion in
2033
Global GNSS shipments will
hit 2 billion units per year by
2027, the installed base nearly
9 billion by 2033
The services enabled by GNSS
devices will generate more than
80% of total GNSS revenues in
2033
Value-added EO services
represent the largest
market and will grow to
almost €5 billion in 2033
EO global revenues
expected to grow from
€3.4 billion in 2023 to
almost €6 billion in 2033
North American EO industry
is overall the most prominent,
while Europe is leading in the
analysis, insights & decision
support category
The second issue of the EO and GNSS Market Report provides a comprehensive assessment of the use of EO and GNSS across a range of different applications, grouped into 15 market segments. The report
also features an Editor’s special on Resilient Societies.
As the global context rapidly changes, overarching market drivers such as the digital transition, climate change, growing population, energy demand and supply chain challenges, along with the rise of New Space
entrepreneurship, support the adoption of EO and GNSS solutions within the segments and applications covered in this report.
As showcased throughout this report, the flagship components of the EU Space Programme covered in this report, Galileo and EGNOS for GNSS and Copernicus for EO are key enablers in the downstream
space application market. The added value and key differentiators of European GNSS and EO are showcased across each market segment displayed in this report, both separately and in synergy with each other.
GNSS
EO
9EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
EO MARKET INTRODUCTION MARKET OVERVIEW
WHAT IS EO?
Earth Observation (EO) refers to remote sensing and in-situ technologies used to capture the planet’s
physical, chemical and biological systems and to monitor land, water (i.e., seas, rivers, lakes) and the
atmosphere. Satellite-based EO relies on the use of satellite-mounted payloads to gather data about
Earth characteristics. As a result, satellite-based platforms are suitable for monitoring and identifying
changes and patterns for a range of physical, economic and environmental applications globally. Once
processed, EO data, often used in complementarity with in-situ measurements, can be assimilated into
complex models to produce information and intelligence (e.g. forecasts, behavioural analysis and climate
projections).
KEY EO PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS
Different types of sensors utilise different EO technologies:
• Optical or thermal sensors are payloads monitoring the energy received from the Earth due to the
reflection and re-emission of the Sun’s energy by the Earth’s surface or atmosphere. They operate
between the visible and infrared wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum.
• Radar sensors are payloads operating in the lower part of the spectrum (longer wavelengths). Most of
these sensors send energy to Earth and measure the feedback from the Earth’s surface or atmosphere,
enabling day and night monitoring during all-weather conditions.
The essential parameters in EO include the sensor resolution:
• Spatial resolution defines the size of the pixels analysed by the sensors. EO satellites can be divided
into three categories based on this parameter: low and medium resolution, high resolution, and very-
high resolution.
• Temporal resolution defines the frequency at which the data is acquired for a defined area. The needs
can vary substantially for this parameter, with applications requiring images every day or every few
hours, while others require updates only every few weeks.
• Spectral resolution is also considered in the case of optical sensors. This is defined by the width of
the spectrum bands that can be distinguished by the payload, enabling some applications that require
the ability to analyse specific wavelengths.
• Radiometric resolution expresses the sensitivity of the sensor. The finer the radiometric resolution,
the more sensitive it is to small differences in the energy emitted or reflected by an object.
Additional key parameters are represented by the geolocation accuracy, the spectral range, and latency.
In-orbit infrastructures may offer a global coverage with a single spacecraft. Orbital geometry, however,
limits the frequency of fly-by over the same location (typically once per day to once every few days)
while local monitoring allows a higher persistence, from a new acquisition every few hours to near real
time.
More details on EO performance parameters and requirements are provided in Annex 2.
Introduction to the EO downstream space application market
* All transactions along the EO value chain (see p13) are considered within these revenue streams, without overlap or
omission.
©ESA, Copernicus
Data Space
EO MARKET
This Market Report considers the EO market to encompass activities where satellite EO-based data and
value-added services enable a variety of applications across multiple segments. It is noteworthy that the
present report does not include applications belonging to the defence domain.
The EO market presented in this report displays EO data and EO value-added service revenues
separately, as well as combined into a single chart. This illustrates the different ways in which users in
different segments access information based on satellite remote sensing. Data revenues arise from a
financial transaction between an EO data provider and a user (this user can be either a service provider
or an end-user with processing capabilities). Value-added service revenues are generated further
along the value chain and stem from a transaction between an EO products and services provider, or
information provider (that uses free and/or commercial input data) and an end-user*.
This report covers only the commercial EO market, meaning that the market quantification captures only
activities based on commercial transactions. Therefore grant-funded activities in the EO domain are
outside the scope of this Market Report.
ON CHARTS AND METHODOLOGY
Data contained within the charts starting from the year 2023 are estimated, forecast and subject to
update in the next edition of the Market Report. These will only change if the number of applications is
expanded in future reports.
Terminology used in charts:
✓ Revenue: The revenues from data/services sales in a given year.
✓ Regions: European Union (EU27), North America, Asia-Pacific, Russia & Non-EU27 Europe (Non-
EU27 Europe), Middle East & Africa, and South America & Caribbean.
Revenues are presented from two different angles. First, EO demand indicates the region in which
revenues are generated, similarly to the shipment of GNSS. Second, the market share shows the origin of
supply – i.e. the headquarters of the company (or its ultimate parent) offering the product – as presented
on the dedicated industry and market share pages. The difference between the EO demand data and the
supply-driven market share analysis data thus gives an indication of the trade balance between regions.
For methodology and sources, and for abbreviations used within the report, please see Annex 1 and
Annex 4, respectively.
Introduction to the EO downstream space application market
Although EO data and services, combined with data from meteorological satellites, contribute to
the generation of weather data and services, weather services are not included in this market
report as an EO segment. Dedicated weather services at segment level (e.g., Agriculture) are
included since these are specific EO applications with a commercial business model.
EO
10
MARKET OVERVIEW EO WORLD MAP
EO demand world map
Global
2023 2033
Value Value
Data revenues (€ m) 595 980
Value-added service
revenues (€ m) 2 775 4 960
European Union (EU27)
2023 2033
Value % Value %
Data revenues (€ m) 100 17 195 20
Value-added service
revenues (€ m) 415 15 760 15
Russia & Non-EU27 Europe
(Non-EU27 Europe)
2023 2033
Value % Value %
Data revenues (€ m) 45 8 90 9
Value-added service
revenues (€ m) 205 7 390 8
North America
2023 2033
Value % Value %
Data revenues (€ m) 265 45 375 38
Value-added service
revenues (€ m) 1 335 48 2 175 44
Asia-Pacific
2023 2033
Value % Value %
Data revenues (€ m) 120 20 220 22
Value-added service
revenues (€ m) 510 18 1 105 22
South America & Caribbean
2023 2033
Value % Value %
Data revenues (€ m) 35 6 50 5
Value-added service
revenues (€ m) 155 6 265 5
Middle East & Africa
2023 2033
Value % Value %
Data revenues (€ m) 30 5 50 5
Value-added service
revenues (€ m) 155 6 265 5
EO
11EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
THE ROLE OF EO MARKET OVERVIEW
Role of EO across the market segments
Of the 15 market segments presented in this EO and GNSS Market Report, 14 have a strong or even dominant influence of EO applications. For each of these segments, a brief summary of the scope is
presented below. More insight into segment-specific use of EO can be found in Annex 3. The Space segment does not include any EO content.
Agriculture – Modern farming relies on EO data and information for sustainable nutrient
management, restoring soil health and the preservation of biodiversity. EO now plays a
vital role in many day-to-day farming operations, such as vegetation health monitoring,
field delineation and guiding the variable application of farming inputs such as fertilisers.
Aviation and Drones – EO has enabled monitoring of weather impact (e.g. volcanic ash
clouds) and hazardous weather on Aviation and Drones. This helped stakeholders to carry
out their operations safely and plan their maintenance effectively. On the other hand, EO
data is also used to monitor Aviation’s impact on the environment (e.g. contrail monitoring
and mitigation), thus allowing stakeholders to reduce their footprint.
Climate, Environment, and Biodiversity – Various environmental parameters obtained
by EO data contribute to an increasing number of international, regional and local policies
related to, or impacting, the environment. The role of EO in climate services is well-
established, contributing invaluable data for climate modelling. EO also improves our
understanding of the health of ecosystems and existing and potential stressors therein.
Consumer Solutions, Tourism and Health – EO-enabled health apps focusing on air
quality and UV monitoring are finding traction in the market. Sustainable and safer
tourism fruition is enabled by EO by providing, for example, insights into wave conditions
and water quality.
Emergency Management and Humanitarian Aid – EO is providing the ‘full picture’
needed for context-aware emergency responses, ranging from preparedness, prevention
and mitigation to response and post-event recovery. EO provides comprehensive
information over vast, remote and volatile areas, offering reliable and frequently updated
documentation, assessments, and real-time monitoring of humanitarian situations.
Energy and Raw Materials – EO-powered solutions are widely used in the Energy segment
to help renewable energy project developers estimate annual energy production, assess
risks to energy assets, or nowcast near-term energy production to balance the electrical
grid. In the Raw Materials segment, EO data helps monitor environmental impact, identify
areas with high mineral resources potential, detect illegal mining activities, and increase
safety by monitoring mine pit/tailings slope stability.
Fisheries and Aquaculture – Dedicated EO services and products bring value-added
in the Fisheries and Aquaculture segment by providing insights in salinity, temperature
and water quality, among others, and thus greatly improving Fisheries and Aquaculture
outputs. EO also allows Fisheries to monitor and predict where fish may migrate and now
plays a pivotal role in detecting illegal fishing activities at sea.
Forestry – EO is becoming an extremely valuable tool in monitoring and maintaining the
sustainability of forests. Foresters can use EO to understand forest health and optimise
operations. From carbon monitoring to battling deforestation and degradation, EO is
contributing to conservation of forests all around the world.
Infrastructure – EO increasingly supports site selection and construction and post-
construction monitoring through satellite-based ground deformation assessment.
Thanks to its capacity to deliver information on risk exposure and the future impacts of
climate change, EO can also help to design more resilient infrastructures and to optimise
maintenance operations, in particular for large and/or linear infrastructures.
Insurance and Finance – EO data is used to compute parametric products benefiting
both finance and insurance stakeholders. Risk and claim assessments based on EO data
brought increased granularity to risk selection and pricing for insurers.
Maritime and Inland Waterways – Thanks to EO, and in synergy with GNSS, applications
such as ship route optimisation contribute to a more efficient means of maritime transport.
This optimisation also leads to reduced emissions as well as safer modes of navigation,
leading to net benefits for the industry and society.
Rail – EO contributes to the overall safety of the railway network by providing railway
infrastructure managers with information on risk exposure in relation to vegetation
encroachment, landslides and floods. In the future, thanks to its capacity to detect
millimetre-scale ground movements, EO should also play an increasing role in the
monitoring of track deformation and infrastructure health along the track.
Road and Automotive – While the use of EO is rather new and innovative, applications
such as congestion control and infotainment services have greatly benefited from global
EO data, contributing to road safety.
Urban Development and Cultural Heritage – EO provides critical data for urban planning,
helping cities manage growth, infrastructure, environmental sustainability and resilience.
It further aids in monitoring cultural heritage sites, ensuring their preservation by tracking
changes, threats and facilitating informed conservation efforts.
EO
12
MARKET OVERVIEW EO REVENUES
The global market for Earth Observation (EO) data and services, examined across 15 segments (with
Space being the only segment not associated with the EO market in this report), has been categorised
based on an analysis of over 100 market-based applications. Although various EO applications have
been recognised within each segment, only 12 of these EO segments presently have quantifiable
data on revenue streams from data and value-added services. Quantifiable EO data for the Aviation
and Drones, and Rail segments is not available.
In 2023, the global revenues from EO data and value-added services amounted to €3.4 billion.
Almost half of this total is generated by the top three segments: Climate, Environment and Biodiversity,
Agriculture, and Urban Development and Cultural Heritage. However, projections suggest significant
growth in the Insurance and Finance segment, with an expected increase from around €340 million in
2023 to becoming the leading contributor to global EO revenues in 2033, reaching almost €900 million.
By 2033, the overall revenues of the global EO data and value-added services market are projected
to reach nearly €6 billion.
The forecasted growth of EO data and service revenues can be attributed to multiple drivers in
multiple segments. EO value-added services provide insights into production in the Agriculture and
Forestry segments, saving time and money for those working in these sectors. With the effects of
climate change being felt more harshly each year, EO services are invaluable to these segments, not to
mention the value EO observation brings to the Climate, Environmental and Biodiversity sector through
continuous and complete information hard to obtain through other systems. EO data is used to feed
risk assessment in Insurance and Finance with information not available otherwise or available but with
a not comparable level of accuracy and update frequency. Also, EO provides critical data for urban
planning, supporting sustainable development.
As depicted in the chart on the left, showcasing the EO global revenues between 2023 and 2033, both
value added services and EO data are forecasted to rapidly expand in the coming decade.
Revenues generated from EO data alone in 2023 amounted to almost €600 million across all segments.
The EO data market is expected to see a CAGR of 5% by 2033, resulting in total revenues of almost
€1 billion.
The EO value-added services market, on the other hand, is considerably larger than the EO data market.
EO value added services generated globally a total of around €2.8 billion in 2023. Starting in 2023,
the EO value-added services market is expected to experience a CAGR of almost 6%, achieving total
revenues of almost €5 billion by 2033.
Revenues generated from EO data and service keep growing consistently
Global revenue of EO data and services sales
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Global revenue of EO data and services sales
Revenues of EO data salesRevenues of EO services sales
Distribution of revenue by segments (€m, 2023)
Europe
24%
South Korea
5%
Japan
13%
Geographical Split of revenues in the GNRS industry
0
200
400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031
Revenues of EO dRevenues of EO services sales
Total revenue
€ 3.4bn
Consumer solutions,
Tourism and Health
3%
Insurance & Finance
10%
Road and Automotive
3%
Maritime and Inland
Waterways
3%
Emergency Management
and Humanitarian Aid
7%
Infrastructure
8%
Agriculture
13%
Forestry
6%
Fisheries and Aquaculture
2%
Energy and Raw Materials
10%
Urban Development and
Cultural Heritage
13%
Climate, Environment
and Biodiversity
22%
EO
13EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
END USERS
END USERS
INFORMATION
PROVIDERS
EO PRODUCTS
AND SERVICE
PROVIDERS
ANALYSIS, INSIGHTS,
AND DECISION SUPPORT
PLATFORM
PROVIDERS
DATA
PROCESSING
EO VALUE-ADDED SERVICES
INFRASTRUCTURE
PROVIDERS
DATA ACQUISTION
AND DISTRIBUTION
EO DATA
List of companies List of companies List of companies List of companies List of end users
LEGEND
Demand value chain
Supply value chain
Detailed value chain
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
Users
DATA
PROVIDERS
List of companies
List of public
entities List of public entities List of public entities List of public entities List of public entities
EO INDUSTRY MARKET OVERVIEW
EO industry overview
Europe1 and the United States generate the most revenues 2 from EO data and value-added services.
The pie chart below illustrates the revenues from the supply perspective, delineating the sources of EO
data and services. This is different from the EO demand world map, which indicates the regions in
which EO data and services revenues are generated
(page 10).
Collectively, US and European companies account
for a market share of more than 85%, with each
being responsible for over 40%. Chinese companies
represent 6% of the market, while Canada and Japan
generate 3% and 2% of global revenues, respectively.
The downstream EO industry is organised into
three categories: data acquisition and distribution,
data processing, and analysis, insights & decision
support. The table in the top right corner highlights
the leading 10 companies in each of these value
chain categories. Notably, top companies often vary
across the value chain, although major players, such
as Maxar, Airbus and Amazon, have a presence in
more than one category.
1 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.
2 A different methodology was used to calculate EO revenues compared to rest of the report. This methodology measures the size of EO industry from a supply perspective based on a bottom-up approach which quantifies revenues attributable to EO of around 500 individual companies for which
financial data are available (those with turnover greater than the threshold exempting small firms from financial reporting – this threshold is not universal so smaller companies may be included in some regions than in others). Companies are allocated to a single region based on the registered
headquarters of the company (or its ultimate parent), which indicates the regions in which the revenues deriving from EO data and services are generated. In contrast, the methodology in the rest of the report attributes the size of the EO market to the region where data or services are
sold and used. Specifically, this means that the European share of the EO market presented on this page is a methodologically different statistic to the share of revenues presented for EU27 in the map on page 10. For further information on the methodology, please refer to Annex 1.
The top 10 companies mentioned above are listed in alphabetical order
Data acquisition
and distribution Data processing Analysis, insights
& decision support Users
Alphabet (Google) US Alphabet (Google) US 21AT CN
Users of EO
products
and services
across the
different
market
segments
Airbus NL Airbus NL Airbus NL
Amazon US Amazon US BASF DE
ESRI US CGI CA Beijing Piesat CN
KSAT NO ESRI US CGI CA
Leonardo IT Garmin US NEC Corporation JP
Maxar US Leonardo IT Leonardo IT
Planet US Maxar US Maxar US
Thales FR Oracle Corp US Trimble US
Verisk US Trimble US VITO BE
The EO value chain
The EO value chain is presented at three levels. At the highest level (light blue), the market is split by EO data and EO value-added services. At the next level (blue), industry players fit into three categories,
namely, data acquisition and distribution; data processing; and analysis, insights & decision support. At the lowest level (dark blue), the detailed value chain includes:
• Data providers: Providers of unprocessed or pre-processed EO data from multiple sources (i.e. satellites and
in-situ (non-space) measurements). Typically operating a data-as-a-service business model.
• Infrastructure providers: Providers of various types of computing infrastructure upon which EO data can be
accessed, stored, distributed or manipulated. Typically operating an infrastructure-as-a-service business model.
• Platform providers: Providers of online platforms and/or digital services, through which users can utilise tools
and capabilities to analyse EO data, develop algorithms and build applications. Typically, operating platform-as-
a-service and/or software-as-a-service business models.
• EO products and service providers: Providers of products (e.g. land cover classifications) or services (e.g. ground
motion monitoring) that make full use of EO data and processing capabilities offered by data and platform
providers. Typically operating an analytics-as-a-service business model.
• Information providers: Providers of sector-specific information that incorporates EO data along with non-EO
data. Typically operating an insights-as-a-service business model.
• End Users: Final users benefitting in their decision making or operations from the solutions offered by EO
services and/or information providers.
The entities listed in the value chains of the different segments are to be considered as representative examples and
non-exhaustive of the entire market.
Example of a generic EO value chain
Geographical split of revenues
in the EO industry 2021
Top 10 companies across the value chain based on 2021 revenues
United States
43%
Europe
44%
Canada
3%
China
6%
Japan
2% Rest of the World
2%
Geographical Split of revenues in the EO industry
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Global revenue of EO data and services sales
Revenues of EO data salesRevenues of EO services sales
Total revenue
€ 3.4bn
Consumer solutions,
Tourism and Health
3%
Insurance & Finance
10%
Road and Automotive
3%
Maritime and Inland
Waterways
3%
Emergency Management
and Humanitarian Aid
7%
Infrastructure
8%
Urban Development and
Cultural Heritage
13%
Climate, Environment
and Biodiversity
22%
EO
14
MARKET OVERVIEW EUROPEAN EO – INDUSTRY
European EO market share by value chain categories
The EO value chain starts with companies involved in data acquisition and distribution, which
provide raw, unprocessed or pre-processed data from EO constellations. North America leads with
around 50% of shares, with Europe following and retaining around 40% of the market.
Subsequently, data processing companies perform the systematic review of data with the purpose
of extracting any potential valuable knowledge. In the EO data market, entities that work at this step
in the value chain leverage EO data to provide online platforms or digital services through which
users can utilise tools and capabilities to analyse EO data, develop algorithms and build applications.
In 2021, North American companies led with around 55% of the market. This large share is due to the
presence of very large companies including AWS, Alphabet (Google) and Maxar. Europe accounted
for around 35% of the market in data processing and had significant market shares in the Aviation,
Climate, Environment, and Biodiversity, and Insurance and Finance segments. Over 200 European
companies had EO data processing related activities across all market segments, more than double
the number of North American companies.
The EO value chain category following data processing is analysis, insights and decision support;
Europe has more than a 50% share of this global market, while North America has nearly a quarter. In
this stage of the value chain, European service providers, mostly SMEs, have successfully specialised
in addressing their need of their clients for customised solutions.
Please note the changes in market share are driven by general market trends, mergers and acquisitions,
and exchange rate fluctuations.
NOTES
The footnotes presented on page 13 also apply to this page. For further information on the methodology, please refer to Annex 1.
The European EO industry covers more than a third of the global
processing market
Focus on Europe – The EARSC Industry Survey 2023
The European Association of Remote Sensing Companies (EARSC) is a not-for-profit organisation which coordinates and promotes the activities of European companies
engaged in delivering Earth Observation-derived geo-information services. Acting as a bridge between industry, decision makers and users and covering the full EO
value chain (from data acquisition through processing, fusion, analysis and final geo-information products and services), the organisation’s members span across 27
countries and include over 140 companies (including SMEs and start-ups).
Since 2013, EARSC has been conducting an industry survey to compile facts and figures concerning the state of the European EO industry. Please note that the industry
survey also covers defence in its scope.
Based on outcomes from its eighth edition, the EO services sector comprised of 772 Companies (an increase of 3.5% compared to the 2022 survey) across
34 countries (comprising EU and ESA member states). Companies offering services or supplying (selling) data or information using satellite data generated a total of
€1.7 bn revenues (driven by Copernicus data and information) in 2022 (an increase of +10.9% compared to the previous year).
Considering around 14 000 employees estimated in the sector, the European EO industry results to still be largely dominated by micro and small companies. The 2022
Survey shows that, similarly to the previous year, approximately 96% of the companies covered have less than 50 employees, whereas 66% have less than 10 employees.
More information available at: EARSC Industry Survey 2023 - EARSC and EARSC website
Note: Segment share for the ‘rest of the world’ is not shown nor accounted for in this table. Rounding is performed to the level of 5%.
EO Regional market shares in data processing, by market segment - 2021
Europe North
America Asia+Russia Europe North
America Asia+Russia
30% 50% 20% 30% 60% 10%
85% 10% 5% 30% 60% 10%
65% 20% 15% 80% 20% 0%
10% 75% 15% 65% 20% 15%
35% 40% 25% 30% 5% 65%
50% 25% 25% 30% 70% 0%
70% 30% 0% 35% 55% 10%
EO
15EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
EUROPEAN EO – COPERNICUS MARKET OVERVIEW
Copernicus is the European Union's Earth Observation and Monitoring EU
Space Programme component
Copernicus delivers accurate, consistent and reliable information in the field of environment and
security and supports a wide range of Union policies in domains such as Agriculture, Climate,
Environment, Energy, Fisheries and Aquaculture, Forestry and Infrastructure. Mainly tailored to the
needs of public authorities, Copernicus also serves research, academic, commercial and other private
users. The system consists of three main components: a Space Component, which delivers data from
a fleet of dedicated observation satellites (the ‘Sentinels’) and other Copernicus Contribution Missions
(CCM); an In-Situ Component which collects data acquired by a multitude of sensors at air-, sea- and
ground-level, and includes a specific category of information known as geospatial reference data; and a
Service Component which transforms the various data into timely and actionable information products.
The programme is managed by the European Commission and implemented in partnership with
the Member States, European Space Agency (ESA), European Organisation for the Exploitation of
Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT), European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts
(ECMWF), Mercator Ocean International, the European Environment Agencies (EEA), the Joint Research
Centre (JRC), FRONTEX, the European Maritime Safety Agency (EMSA), the EU Satellite Centre (SatCen),
which jointly represent the entrusted Entities.
Six Sentinel families are designed to serve a wide range of users
The Sentinels are the Earth Observation satellites dedicated to the Copernicus programme and
are designed to meet the needs of the Copernicus services and their users. The six Sentinel families,
presented below, ensure an independent and autonomous Earth Observation capacity for Europe with
global coverage. The satellites provide observations which serve a wide range of users for a multitude
of applications in the areas of climate, land and ocean services, emergency management, atmosphere
and air quality, among others.
Copernicus Sentinel expansion missions
Currently, six Sentinel expansion missions are being studied to address foreseen gaps in Copernicus
user needs. CHIME would provide hyperspectral data to support sustainable agricultural and biodiversity
management, as well as soil property characterisation. CIMR would provide observations of sea-surface
temperature, sea-ice concentration and sea-surface salinity for Arctic user communities. The CO2M
mission would measure atmospheric carbon dioxide produced by human activity, providing the EU
with a unique and independent source of information to assess the effectiveness of policy measures.
CRISTAL would measure and monitor sea-ice thickness and overlying snow depth in support of maritime
operations. LSTM would provide observations of land-surface temperature to aid the agricultural user
community. ROSE-L’s radar data would be used in support of forest management, to monitor subsidence
and soil moisture and to discriminate crop types for precision farming and food security.
Copernicus Contributing Missions
The Copernicus Contributing Missions (CCM) play a vital role in meeting user needs, delivering data
that complements the output of the Copernicus Sentinel missions. The complementary data comes
from Contributing Missions from ESA, Member States, EUMETSAT and other third-party operators.
There are around 30 existing or planned contributing missions, encompassing various technologies like
SAR, optical sensors, spectrometers and altimetry systems. These missions are essential to ensure that
the full range of user observational requirements is satisfied.
Recently, ESA started working with European Emerging CCM data providers, which are part of the
European New Space ecosystem and will progressively become part of the data offering. Currently,
nine such data providers (a mix of start-ups, scale-ups and SMEs) are under contract with ESA to
supply multispectral and hyperspectral images, thermal infrared and atmospheric composition data.
They include Aerospacelab, Endurosat, Kuva Space, Absolut Sensing, Prométhée, ConstellR, Orora
Technologies, Aistech, and Satlantis.
The Copernicus Services deliver value-added information products in six thematic
areas
Atmosphere
CAMS
Climate
C3S
Emergency
CEMS
Land
CLMS
Marine
CMEMS
Security*
CSS
A growing number of segments and users count on reliable Copernicus
data and services
Sentinel-1A provides all-weather,
day and night radar imagery for
land and ocean services. Sentinel
1-B was retired in December 2021.
Sentinel-3A & -3B provide optical,
radar and altimetry data for marine
and land services.
Sentinel-5P provides atmospheric
data, bridging the gap between
ENVISAT and future Sentinel-5
data.
Sentinel-6 provides radar data
to measure sea-surface height, for
oceanography and climate studies.
Sentinel-4 & Sentinel-5 are
payloads to fly aboard EUMETSAT
MTG-S and Metop-SG satellites,
to provide atmospheric composition
data.
Sentinel-2A & -2B provide
optical imagery for land and
emergency services.
* Serves registered Public users only
Launch 2024
EO
16
MARKET OVERVIEW EUROPEAN EO – USERS
Access to Copernicus Data
The massive amount of data and information produced in the context of the Copernicus programme –
representing petabytes – are made freely available and accessible to any citizen and any organisation around
the world. As the data archives grow, it becomes more convenient and efficient to analyse data where they
are originally stored, instead of downloading the data locally.
Cloud technologies allow this versatility, while offering users a large choice of options to benefit from the data
generated by Copernicus – i.e. they can search, visualise and further process the data in a fully maintained software
environment, while still having the possibility to download the data to their own computing infrastructure.
Being able to easily access this data is crucial for EO companies, as indicated in the EARSC 2022 survey;
58% of the companies indicated ease of access as the most important reason for using certain platforms.
Data Access Hubs
Copernicus data and services can be accessed through various
hubs, some of which are managed by ESA, such as the new
Copernicus Data Space Ecosystem (see right side of page),
and the Copernicus Contributing Missions Online gateway.
Furthermore, two access hubs are managed by EUMETSAT:
EUMETCast and the Data Store.
In addition to the above platforms, each Copernicus Service has
developed its own online platform which provides users with
access to information products, associated documentation and support services for their use (1000+
Copernicus products are available to users in total).
Additionally, the European Commission has funded the deployment of cloud-based platforms, providing
centralised access to Copernicus data and information, as well as to processing tools. These platforms
are known as Data and Information Access Services (DIAS), allowing users to discover, manipulate,
process and download Copernicus data and information.
Furthermore, the Copernicus Thematic Hubs were launched in 2023. These are single entry points for
the ensemble of data, products and information generated by the Copernicus services and components
for specific thematic or geographical areas. The Hubs correspond to specific EU policy needs and provide
simplified access to key information on selected areas for various stakeholders, policy makers and users.
In 2023, Copernicus has launched four Thematic Hubs; Health, Coastal, Energy and Arctic. Each Hub is
operated by a Copernicus Entrusted Entity.
EU continues to ensure Copernicus data is easily accessible and usable
Copernicus Data Space Ecosystem
Building on the experience gained with the
Copernicus DIAS-es launched in 2017, the
European Commission has recently procured a
new data access service from a consortium led
by T-Systems, which has become operational
in July of 2023: the Copernicus Data Space
Ecosystem (CDSE).
The CDSE means a significant leap forward in
the way users can access and work with Earth
Observation data.
The platform provides access to a large
repository of open and free Earth Observation
data from the Copernicus Sentinel satellites,
including new and historical Sentinel images, as well as Copernicus Contributing Missions. The
CDSE works towards supporting users in accessing, viewing, using, downloading and analysing
data, with the aim of improving access and exploitation of the EU’s Copernicus satellites data. It
is designed to be flexible and adaptable to the needs of different users, while ensuring continuity
of the existing distribution services and DIAS-es.
The Copernicus Data Space Ecosystem
offers:
• Largest EO data offering in the world, with
discovery and download capabilities;
• Set of data processing tools to extract
objective information and conduct public,
private or commercial activities;
• An ecosystem to offer data, services and
applications from public, commercial and
scientific service providers;
• A service to benefit institutional users,
research, commercial sector and citizens.
Through the Full, Free and Open (FFO) data policy of the EU Earth Observation programme,
the data coming from the Sentinel satellites and the added-value products coming from the
Copernicus services are made available free-of-charge to users. Through the FFO, valuable
information and services have been delivered for free and have proven to form a solid basis
for the development of value-added products while stimulating the commercial market of
EO-based products and services. The combination of freely available information and services
with commercial offerings have enabled Earth Observation companies and users to generate the
global revenues presented in this market report.
© ESA, Copernicus
Data Space Ecosystem
© ESA, Copernicus
Data Space Ecosystem
© ESA, Copernicus
Data Space Ecosystem
EO
17EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
EUROPEAN EO – USERS MARKET OVERVIEW
Copernicus is a user-driven programme
From the start, users have been at the centre of the design and implementation of Copernicus and
have driven the implementation and validation of the service-related requirements. The programme
governance differentiates between core1 and other users. Copernicus core users can be policymakers
and public authorities that can use the information as a basis to act or develop policies and legislation,
such as in the environmental field or in the civil protection area in the event of a natural disaster or
humanitarian crisis. Other users include research, commercial and private users.
Initial technical specifications have largely been based on the outcomes of workshops with the Member
States, through ‘implementation groups’ (2007-2010) established by the European Commission, and
of numerous European projects, among which have been the Sixth Framework Programme Global
Monitoring for Environment and Security (FP6 GMES) integrated projects, the GMES Initial Operation
projects and the ESA GMES Service Elements. Following the Copernicus Regulation published in 2014,
the Commission services have engaged in a continuous collection of user needs through questionnaires,
interviews, workshops, studies (e.g. the ‘NEXTSPACE’ project, ‘Copernicus for EC (C4EC)’ study, etc.)
and consultation with bodies such as the European Commission's Directorates General, Member States
and Entrusted Entities.
The programme governance structure also observes the permanent involvement of users, with the
Copernicus User Forum established to assist the programme committee in identifying core user
requirements, verifying service compliance and coordinating public sector users. For non-core users,
EUSPA organises the annual User Consultation Platform (UCP), where users from different market
segments meet to discuss their needs and application-level requirements relevant for Earth Observation
(EO), along with GNSS and secure telecommunications.
1 See STAFF_WORKING_PAPER_2019-394-Expression_of_User_Needs_for_the_Copernicus_Programme.pdf
The latest editions of the User Consultation Platform for the European
Space Programme
The User Consultation Platform (UCP) engages with user communities, industries, service providers
and R&D, bringing together expertise and insights from different applications, sharing experiences
and strengthening an EU network of innovators by encouraging cooperation across broad disciplines.
The last two editions of the UCP also addressed EO, exploring the use case of EO and investigating
associated user requirements.
The UCP of 2022, which was held during the EU Space Week in Prague, attracted over 300 attendees
from seven different market segments including Infrastructure, Energy and Raw Materials, Consumer
Solutions, Aviation and Drones, Maritime and Fisheries, Emergency Management and Humanitarian Aid,
and Insurance and Finance. During the 2023 EU Space Week in Seville, users were grouped in seven
sessions: Agriculture and Forestry, Environmental Climate & Biodiversity, Rail, Public Transport, Road
and Automotive, Space, and Resilient Societies. Both events represented unique opportunities for the
EO community to gather and discuss about needs, challenges and opportunities.
The outcomes of the UCP are used to compile and update a series of Reports on User Needs and
Requirements per market segment. The objective of these documents is to constitute a reference for
each market segment’s user communities by collecting and analysing the most up-to-date user needs
and requirements of the application domains. At the same time, these reports serve as a key input to the
UCP enabling the main included outcomes to be validated and subsequently updated.
The full reports of the UCP 2022 and 2023 are available at the following link:
https://www.euspa.europa.eu/media-library/publications
Understanding user needs is crucial for the EU Space Programme
© EUSPA, EU Space Week 2023
EO
18
MARKET OVERVIEW GNSS MARKET INTRODUCTION
Introduction to the GNSS downstream space application market
WHAT IS GNSS?
Radio Navigation Satellite Services (RNSS) is infrastructure that allows users with a compatible device
to determine their position, velocity and time by processing signals from satellites. RNSS signals are
provided by a variety of satellite positioning systems, including global and regional constellations and
Satellite-Based Augmentation Systems:
➜ Global constellations i.e. Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS): GPS (USA), GLONASS
(Russian Federation), Galileo (EU), BeiDou (PRC).
➜ Regional constellations: QZSS (Japan), NavIC (India), and BeiDou regional component (PRC).
➜ Satellite-Based Augmentation Systems (SBAS): WAAS (USA), EGNOS (EU), MSAS (Japan),
GAGAN (India), SDCM (Russian Federation) and SNAS (PRC).
KEY GNSS PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS
GNSS technology is used for many types of applications, covering the mass market, professional and
safety-critical applications and critical infrastructures. Depending on user needs, important GNSS user
requirements include:
• Availability: The percentage of time the position, navigation or timing solution can be computed by
the user. Values vary greatly according to the specific application and services used, but typically
range from 95-99.9%.
• Accuracy: The difference between true and computed solution (position or time).
• Calibration: The process of measuring the different biases of the GNSS signal’s propagation through
the antenna cable and equipment hardware in order to characterise and consider them when
computing the timing solution (only relates GNSS Timing Receivers).
• Continuity: Ability to provide the required performances during an operation without interruption
once the operation has started.
• Integrity: The measure of trust that can be placed in the correctness of the position or time estimate
provided by the receiver.
• Robustness: Relates to spoofing and jamming and how the system can cope with these issues
- Robustness to jamming is the ability of the system to mitigate radio frequency (RF) interference and
continue operations within stated service performance limits.
- Robustness to spoofing is the ability of the system to prevent, detect and mitigate spoofing attacks.
Authentication relates to the system’s ability to assure the users that they are utilising signals and/
or data from a trustworthy source, and thus enhance its robustness level.
• Time To First Fix (TTFF): A measure of a receiver’s performance covering the time between activation
and output of a position within the required accuracy bounds.
Parameters not directly related to GNSS performance are also important. Such parameters include
power consumption, resilience, connectivity, interoperability and traceability.
More details on GNSS performance parameters and requirements are provided in Annex 2.
GNSS MARKET
This Market Report considers the GNSS market defined as activities where GNSS-based positioning,
navigation and/or timing is a significant enabler of functionality. The GNSS market presented in this
report comprises device and service revenues. The latter include revenues derived from commercial
augmentation services and other services attributable to GNSS.
Commercial augmentation services include GNSS augmentation subscriptions (PPP, RTK, PPP-RTK and
DGNSS). Revenues deriving from other services include software products and content such as digital
maps for portable navigation devices (PNDs) and in-vehicle systems (IVS), as well as data downloaded
through cellular networks specifically to run location-based applications (such as navigation), as well
as the GNSS-attributable revenues of smartphone apps (sales revenues, advertisements and in-app
purchases), subscription revenues from asset management services, drone service revenues across a
range of industries. Both services are shown on the World Map (next page) together as ‘Services’.
For multi-function devices, such as smartphones, the revenues include only the value of GNSS
functionality – not the full device price. Therefore, a case-specific correction factor is used:
• GNSS-enabled smartphone: Only the value of GNSS chipsets is counted.
• Aviation: The value of the GNSS receiver inside the Flight Management System is taken into account,
in addition to the GNSS-specific revenues driven by the certification process.
• Precision agriculture system: The retail value of the GNSS receivers, maps and navigation software
is counted.
• Search and rescue devices: For personal locator beacons and emergency locator transmitters, only the
price differential between GNSS and non-GNSS devices is included.
ON CHARTS AND METHODOLOGY
Data contained within the charts starting from 2023 are estimated, forecast and updated in the next
edition of the Market Report.
Terminology used in charts:
➜ Shipments: The number of devices sold in a given year.
➜ Installed base: The number of devices currently in use.
➜ Revenues: The revenues from device/service sales in a given year.
➜ Regions: European Union (EU27), North America, Asia-Pacific, Russia & Non-EU27 Europe (Non-
EU27 Europe), Middle East & Africa, and South America & Caribbean.
The chart data are presented from two angles. First, GNSS demand shows the regions in which
shipments are sold, devices are used and revenues are generated (accounting for most of the chart
material presented in the report). Second, the market share analysis looks at the origin of supply –
where a company (or its ultimate parent) offering the product is headquartered – as presented on the
dedicated industry and market share pages. The difference between the GNSS demand data and the
supply-driven market share analysis data thus gives an indication of the trade balance between regions.
For methodology and information sources see Annex 1 and for any abbreviation used within the report,
please refer to Annex 4.
GNSS
19EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
GNSS WORLD MAP MARKET OVERVIEW
GNSS demand world map
Global
2023 2033
Value Value
Devices revenues
(€ bn) 71 119
Services revenues
(€ bn) 191 463
European Union (EU27)
2023 2033
Value % Value %
Devices revenues
(€ bn) 16 23 27 23
Services revenues
(€ bn) 32 17 54 12
Russia & Non-EU27 Europe
(Non-EU27 Europe)
2023 2033
Value % Value %
Devices revenues
(€ bn) 6 8 13 11
Services revenues
(€ bn) 9 5 23 5
North America
2023 2033
Value % Value %
Devices revenues
(€ bn) 20 28 35 29
Services revenues
(€ bn) 44 23 74 16
Asia-Pacific
2023 2033
Value % Value %
Devices revenues
(€ bn) 24 34 34 29
Services revenues
(€ bn) 77 40 218 47
South America & Caribbean
2023 2033
Value % Value %
Devices revenues
(€ bn) 2 3 5 4
Services revenues
(€ bn) 10 5 29 6
Middle East & Africa
2023 2033
Value % Value %
Devices revenues
(€ bn) 3 4 5 5
Services revenues
(€ bn) 19 10 65 14
GNSS
20
MARKET OVERVIEW THE ROLE OF GNSS
Role of GNSS across the market segments
GNSS applications have a dominant influence in all the 15 market segments presented in this EO and GNSS Market Report. For each of these segments, a brief summary of the scope is presented below.
More insight into segment-specific use of GNSS can be found in Annex 3. The Climate, Environment, and Biodiversity segment cover GNSS to only a limited extent.
Agriculture – New technologies are pushing the Agriculture sector to new frontiers.
GNSS allows for the efficient guidance of farming machinery and the implementation of
smart farming practices. Enabling growing automation and improved monitoring of the
different operations, use of GNSS leads to increased yield and reduced environmental
impact.
Aviation and Drones – Standardisation and certification of GNSS makes operations safer
and gives access to smaller regional airports without costly investment into ground-based
navaids. GNSS is an indispensable asset that supports all aspects of Aviation. GNSS is
also the only viable means of navigating and tracking drone traffic. The latest U-space
regulation heavily relies on GNSS-based services.
Climate, Environment, and Biodiversity – GNSS has limited but important application in
the climate services domain as the technology supports a range of geodetic applications
that measure properties of the Earth (magnetic field, atmosphere). In the domain of
biodiversity, GNSS-beacons are used to geolocate animals for the purposes of monitoring
migrations, habitats and behaviours.
Consumer Solutions, Tourism and Health – GNSS is ubiquitous in our everyday life. A
very wide array of apps supported by smartphones and wearables enhance individual
fitness and healthcare, on top of navigation, contactless deliveries and much more.
Emergency Management and Humanitarian Aid – GNSS is vital for search and rescue
beacons. It allows the transmission of the accurate positioning of somebody (e.g. mariner
overboard, hiker) or something (e.g. aircraft, vessel) in distress towards the emergency
response teams, enhancing the effectiveness of emergency response efforts in case of
manmade or natural emergencies (e.g. landslides, droughts, earthquakes and floods).
Energy and Raw Materials – Electricity grids rely heavily on timing and synchronisation
enabled by GNSS, balancing supply and demand to ensure safe operations. In the Raw
Materials segment, GNSS supports mining site monitoring, tracking of assets and mining
machinery guidance and is a key enabling technology for various autonomous systems.
Fisheries and Aquaculture – GNSS significantly contributes to Illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing detection with its traditional use in the field, namely tracking the
location of vessels through Automatic Identification System (AIS) and Vessel Monitoring
System (VMS). It also improves safety at sea of fishing vessels.
Forestry – GNSS plays a crucial role in the effective management and long term
sustainability of forests. In particular, GNSS is used to help monitor the health of trees
with on-tree devices, as well as the tracking of timber supply chains.
Infrastructure – GNSS contributes to the proper functioning of Infrastructures operations.
The high accuracy services it offers allow a safe and on-time completion of construction work
and support preventive maintenance operations. The GNSS timing and synchronisation
function is expected to play an increasingly critical role in mobile telecommunication
networks and in the provision of a secure environment for data centres and cloud services.
Insurance and Finance – The financial world relies on GNSS timing and synchronisation
for the accurate timestamping of financial transactions.
Maritime and Inland Waterways – GNSS, on top of being a fundamental tool for
navigation information, is supporting the transition towards digitalisation and more
autonomous vessels. This, coupled with smart ports, paves the way for increased safety
and a more sustainable blue economy.
Rail – GNSS is increasingly becoming a fundamental pillar not only for non-safety
applications (e.g., asset management), but also for improved maintenance, train driving
optimisation, and for safety-related applications, including Enhanced Command & Control
Systems. All this together, will increase capacity, efficiency and safety of railways.
Road and Automotive – GNSS plays a crucial role in ensuring safety and efficiency of road
transport, while also reducing congestions and the related emissions. All this is deployed
through enabling emergency assistance, allowing connected and autonomous cars, supporting
asset management, including tracking of dangerous gods, empowering road user charging and
smart tachograph.
Space – GNSS provides benefits that, undoubtedly, can be exploited in Space: from using
real-time GNSS data for absolute and relative spacecraft navigation, to deriving Earth
Observation measurements from it. Firstly used by Low-Earth Orbit (LEO) satellites, the use
of GNSS has extended to higher regions of the outer space, including GEO orbits and the
cislunar space. Such diversification and proliferation of space users, driven largely by the
New Space paradigm, leads to an increasing need for spaceborne GNSS-based solutions.
Urban Development and Cultural Heritage – GNSS enables precise location-based
data for urban planning, facilitating the deployment of efficient transport networks and
infrastructure development. Additionally, it aids in mapping and preserving cultural
heritage sites, ensuring accurate documentation and restoration efforts.
GNSS
21EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
59.0%
2,0%
9%
2,9%
17,1%
1,5%
6,0%
2,1% 0,4%
Installed base of "Other" by segment (2023)
43,5%
5,0%20,1%
4,2%
16,2%
1,7%
6,1% 2,9% 0,4%
Installed base of Other by segment (2033)
2033 total
installed base:
114 millions
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
9 000
10 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (millions)
Installed base of GNSS devices by segment
Consumer Solutions, Tourism & Health Road & Automotive "Other"
0
2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 20
Service revenues Device
2023 total
installed base:
74 millions
0
5 000 000
10 000 000
15 000 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices b
Aviation and Drones Rail
Agriculture and Forestry Emergency Management and Humanitarian Aid
Maritime and Inland Waterways Fisheries and Aquaculture
Infrastructure Urban Development and Cultural Heritage
Remaining segments
GNSS MARKET MARKET OVERVIEW
Yearly global GNSS devices shipments (graph below) is forecast to continue growing over the next
decade, reaching more than 2.2 billion units in 2033 from nearly 1.6 bn units in 2023. The Consumer
Solutions, Tourism and Health segment accounts for 90% of all global annual shipments, mainly due
to the significant number of sales of smartphones and wearables. Asia-Pacific is expected to maintain
the largest market share with almost 50% of the global market expected by 2033.
The overall installed base of GNSS devices (upper-right graph) is projected to grow from 5.6 billion
units in 2023 to almost 9.0 billion units in 2033. Similar to global shipments, Consumer Solutions
will continue to dominate, maintaining almost 90% of global GNSS devices in use in 2023, but slowly
decreasing to below 85% by 2033 due to the increasing maturity of consumer devices, increased
attention to sustainability (i.e. longer lifetimes), and disruptions to the supply chain due to international
crises, which significantly affect smartphones.
In parallel, the Road and Automotive segment is increasingly adopting and integrating in-vehicle
systems into new car shipments, with its share of the global installed base of GNSS devices expected to
grow from over 10% in 2023 to over 15% in 2033.
As for other segments (bottom-right graphs), Aviation and Drones will continue to grow, rising from 44
million units in 2023 to almost 50 million units in 2033. Maritime, the second largest market in 2023,
will see its global share of over 17% (corresponding to 13 million units) drop to 16% (18 million) in 2033.
Agriculture will take over as the second largest segment, reaching 20% of the global market in 2033,
with around 23 million units, up from less than 7 million in 2023.
The GNSS market will continue growing towards long-term maturity
Installed base of GNSS devices by segment
0
500
1 000
1 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (millions)
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
59.0%
2,0%
9%
2,9%
17,1%
1,5%
6,0%
2,1% 0,4%
Installed base of "Other" by segment (2023)
20,1%
4,2%
16,2%
1,7%
6,1% 2,9
Ins
i
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
9 000
10 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (millions)
Installed base of GNSS devices by segment
Consumer Solutions, Tourism & Health Road & Automotive "Other"
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2021
€ (billions)
2023 total
installed base:
74 millions
0
5 000 000
10 000 000
15 000 000
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by region
0
500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (millions)
Shipments of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
8 000
9 000
10 000
Installed base of GNSS devices by segment
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031
€ (billions)
Revenue from GNSS devices sales and services
Service revenues Device revenues
15 000 000
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Installed base of "Other" by segment (2023) Installed base of "Other" by segment (2033)
GNSS
* Remaining segments includes Space, Insurance and Finance, Energy and Raw Materials
22
59.0%
2,0%
9%
2,9%
17,1%
1,5%
6,0%
2,1% 0,4%
43,5%
5,0%20,1%
4,2%
16,2%
1,7%
6,1% 2,9% 0,4%
2033 total
installed base:
114 millions
Road & Automotive
25,9%
Consumer Solutions,
Tourism & Health
65,7%
Aviation and
Drones
0,7%Rail
0,3%
Agriculture
3,9%
Urban Development and
Cultural Heritage
1,7%
Emergency Management
and Humanitarian Aid
0,1% Maritime and Inland
Waterways
0,3%
Fisheries and
Aquaculture
0,1%
Infrastructures
1,1%
Remaining
segments
0,3%
Other
8,4%
Cumulative revenue by segment 2023 -2033
Total:
€4.6 tn
Total:
€390 bn
2023 total
installed base:
74 millions
Aviation and Drones Rail
Agriculture and Forestry Emergency Management and Humanitarian Aid
Maritime and Inland Waterways Fisheries and Aquaculture
Infrastructure Urban Development and Cultural Heritage
Remaining segments
0
500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (millions)
Shipments of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
Installed base of "Other" by segment (2023) Installed base of Other by segment (2033)
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
9 000
10 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (millions)
Installed base of GNSS devices by segment
Consumer Solutions, Tourism & Health Road & Automotive "Other"
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031
€ (billions)
Revenue from GNSS devices sales and services
Service revenues Device revenues
0
5 000 000
10 000 000
15 000 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
MARKET OVERVIEW GNSS REVENUES
The global GNSS downstream market revenues from both device and service sales are expected
to grow from around €260 billion in 2023 to around €580 billion in 2033 with a CAGR of over 8%.
Revenues from services* are driving the growth. Overall, service revenues (i.e. both augmentation
services and other services attributable to GNSS) will account for around €460 billion in 2033 or almost
80% of the total global GNSS downstream market revenues. This is in line with expectations, since
the more the GNSS market matures, the more services become relevant compared with devices.
Revenues from smartphone apps represent an important component, amounting to over 60% of
added-value services, and over 40% of the total revenues. This is due to increasing digitalisation and
the growing uptake of user-friendly solutions which have transformed the most common smartphone
apps into unmissable platforms for our daily live such as personal banking, the use of various ride-hailing
apps, tourism applications and a plethora of in-app purchases for games and social media applications
which all rely on GNSS for their functionalities.
The market segments Consumer Solutions and Road continue to dominate in terms of
cumulative revenues with a combined total of over 90% for the forecasting period 2023-2033.
Within the Road and Automotive segment, most of the revenues are generated from devices
used for navigation, such as Connected and Automated Driving (CAD), navigation apps and
mapping software updates, In-Vehicle Systems (IVS) and asset management applications
including insurance telematics. Meanwhile, revenues from Consumer Solutions mainly come from
revenues related to GNSS-enabled apps and GNSS-enabled data revenues from smartphones
and tablets.
For the remaining revenues, almost 80% will be generated by Agriculture (46%), Urban
Development (20%) and Infrastructure (13%). In Agriculture and Urban Development,
revenues are predominantly generated by commercial augmentation services (and automatic
steering equipment for agriculture), while the primary sources of revenues in Infrastructure are
linked to mapping and surveying, construction operations and site selection or monitoring.
The GNSS cumulative revenues are forecast to reach €4.6 trillion in the next
decade with services accounting for almost 80% in 2033
*Please refer to page 18 for a more detailed definition
Cumulative revenue by segment 2023-2033
Revenue from GNSS devices sales and services
* Remaining segments includes Space, Forestry, Insurance and Finance, Energy and Raw Materials
GNSS
23EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
USERS OF PNT
INFORMATION
List of users
relying on the PNT
information that
aren’t the end user
(e.g. monitoring
agencies, data
companies, etc.)
END
USERS
ADDED-VALUE
SERVICE PROVIDERS
SYSTEM
INTEGRATORS
RECEIVER
MANUFACTURERS
COMPONENT
MANUFACTURES
ORGANISATIONS/
STANDARDISATIONS
List of companies List of companies List
of companies
List of companies List of end
users
List of
organisations and
standardisation
bodies
LEGEND
Public offering / entities
Commercial offering
Users
China
13%
Other
14%
USA
31%
Europe
24%
South Korea
5%
Japan
13%
Geographical Split of revenues in the GNRS industry
Forestry
6%
2%
GNSS INDUSTRY MARKET OVERVIEW
GNSS industry overview
1 A different methodology was used to calculate GNSS revenues compared to rest of the report as described in Annex 1. This methodology measures the size of GNSS industry from a supply perspective based on a bottom-up approach which quantifies revenues attributable to GNSS
of 1 000 individual companies for which financial data are available (those with turnover greater than the threshold exempting small firms from financial reporting – this threshold is not universal so smaller companies may be included in some regions than in others). Companies are
allocated to a single region based on the registered headquarters of the company (or its ultimate parent), which indicates the regions in which the revenues deriving from GNSS equipment and services are generated. In contrast, the methodology in the rest of the report attributes
the size of the GNSS market to the region where equipment or services are sold and used. Specifically, this means that the European share of the GNSS market presented in this table is a methodologically different statistic to the share of the revenues presented for EU27 in the
map on page 19. For further information on the methodology, please refer to Annex 1.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.
The top 10 companies mentioned above are listed in alphabetical order.
The GNSS value chain
Across the different market segments, the core of the GNSS industry value chain is centralised around the three categories as explained above. Nonetheless, every market segment has its own specific value
chain and, therefore, we strongly recommend you explore these per segment. In general, each value will most probably contain all the following categories of stakeholders:
• (Inter)national organisations and standardisation bodies: regulated segments, such as
Maritime and Aviation, will present a first link in their value chain dedicated to bodies setting
GNSS standards and requirements (not present in each segment).
• Component manufacturers: these support the industry by producing chips, antennas and other
inputs for GNSS receivers.
• Receiver manufacturers: added value and market specificities are conferred by device/product
manufacturers specialised across segments.
• System integrators (and design consultancies): these are responsible for the technical
implementation of the GNSS equipment into a complex system.
• Added-value service providers: these companies provide either added-value or augmentation
services to end users (augmentation providers have different relevance across segments; they are
not present in some segments, while they are covered by a dedicated stage of the value chain if
they are of key importance in other segments).
• End users/users of positioning information: the final users who benefit from the applications and
services offered by system integrators.
Example of a generic GNSS value chain
Top 10 companies across the value chain based on 2021 revenues
Components & Receivers
Manufacturers System integrators Added-Value Service
Providers End users
Avago (Broadcom) US Apple US Alphabet (Google) US
Users of
GNSS-based
solutions
across the
different
market
segments
Beijing Bdstar
Navigation CN China First Automobile
Group Corporation CN Denso JP
Garmin US Ford US ESRI US
Hexagon SE Garmin US Facebook US
Kongsberg Maritime NO General Motors US Garmin US
Mediatek CN Oppo CN Hexagon SE
Qualcomm US Samsung Electronics KR HERE International NL
Trimble Navigation US Stellantis NL Microsoft US
United Technologies
Corporation US Toyota JP Tencent CN
VALEO FR Volkswagen DE Trimble Navigation US
Revenues1 from GNSS components and receivers, system integrators and software / added-value
services are predominantly generated by companies based in the US and Europe 2. The US maintains
the largest portion of the market (over 30%), followed
closely by Europe (almost 25%).
By contrast, Japan, China and South Korea combined
account for 30% of the global market.
The downstream GNSS industry is split into three
categories: components and receivers manufacturers,
system integrators, and added-value service
providers. The top-right table displays the top 10
companies in each value chain category. Components
and receiver manufacturers’ ranking is dominated by
US companies (five out of 10). System integrators,
although more geographically diverse, are dominated
by automotive or smartphone companies. Lastly, tech
giants such as Alphabet, Tencent and Microsoft appear
on the list for added-value service providers, together
with augmentation service providers like Trimble.
Geographical split of revenues
in the GNSS industry 2021
GNSS
24
MARKET OVERVIEW EUROPEAN GNSS – INDUSTRY
The European GNSS industry is leading in several transport applications,
Finance and Space
European GNSS market share by vale chain categories
The adjacent table presents the regional market shares for components and receivers manufacturers for
each market segment in 2021.
European companies are found to hold 30% of the global GNSS components and receivers market in
2021. Europe’s market share varies across market segments. European companies are leading in segments
such as Maritime (45%), and Finance (70%), but trailing behind the average market shares in segments
such as Consumer Solutions (5%), Aviation and Drones (15%), and Urban Development (5%).
Europe accounts for over 25% of the system integrators global market share and almost 20% in
added-value service providers in 2021.
Please note that changes in market share are driven by general market trends, mergers and acquisitions,
and exchange rate fluctuations.
NOTES
The footnotes presented on page 23 also apply to this page. For further information on the methodology, please refer to Annex 1.
Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report
Secure Satellite Communications (SATCOM) is essential for
the resilience and strategic autonomy of the European Union
and its Member States. It’s the basis for security- and safety-
critical missions and operations, supports crisis management,
surveillance missions, the protection of critical infrastructure
and situational awareness. Secure SATCOM services are also
widely used in a variety of applications, ranging from the response
to natural disasters, telemedicine and telehealth services in
remote locations, maritime emergencies and key infrastructure, including air traffic management.
In this context, and with GOVSATCOM and IRIS2 underway, experts at EUSPA produced the first
ever Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report. The long study aims to help relevant
public and private actors identify business opportunities, set the basis for developing the market
and enable the realisation of benefits from satellite communications, both in the EU and worldwide.
The report consists of two parts: (i) the secure SATCOM market and (ii) the secure SATCOM user
technology chapter. The secure SATCOM market chapter offers a comprehensive review of various
relevant SATCOM use cases, the forecasted capacity demand and an overview of the supply side
as well. The user technology chapter provides an overview of the technologies currently shaping
the downstream industry. It identifies key trends such as the increased capacity offered by High-
throughput Satellite Systems (HTS), the deployment of multi-orbit and multi-band terminals, optical
communications, interoperability, and standards.
EUSPA-UNOOSA Report, contributing to the Space 2030 Agenda
In support to the implementation of the Space2030 Agenda, EUSPA
in partnership with the United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs
(UNOOSA) produced the report “Contribution to the Space2030
Agenda – The European Union Space Programme “EU Space”
Supporting a world with a global population of 8 Billion people”. The
report aims to raise awareness about the contribution of space,
and, thus, the European Union Space Programme components to the
achievement of global agendas.
More specifically, the EUSPA-UNOOSA work sheds light on the
challenges to the sustainable development of humankind, by
identifying eight global demographic challenges, including food
security, climate change and environmental impacts among others.
Finally, the report provides examples of how space applications
can support the solution to the identified challenges and presents
relevant European case studies.
Note: Segment share for the ‘rest of the world’ is not shown nor accounted for in this table. Rounding is performed to the level of 5%. The
reader should be aware that, unlike the approach adopted for the previous issue of this report, some companies active in the Road and
Automotive segment that used to be considered manufacturers, are now categorised as system integrators, as this approach is considered
more appropriate and representative. This aspect needs to be considered by the reader especially when comparing the new findings with
the ones presented in the previous issue of this report.
GNSS Regional market shares of Components & Receivers Manufacturers, by market segment - 2021
Europe North
America Asia+Russia Europe North
America Asia+Russia
15% 45% 40% 15% 55% 30%
15% 75% 10% 25% 40% 35%
5% 50% 45% 45% 35% 20%
45% 45% 10% 25% 25% 50%
35% 25% 40% 40% 25% 35%
70% 30% 0% 5% 35% 60%
45% 40% 15%
Must read space reports
UNITED NATIONS
OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
UNITED NATIONS
CONTRIBUTION TO THE “SPACE2030” AGENDA
EU SPACE
SUPPORTING A WORLD OF
8 BILLION PEOPLE
GNSS
25EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
EUROPEAN GNSS – GALILEO AND EGNOS MARKET OVERVIEW
Galileo is the European Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS), providing standalone
navigation, positioning and timing information (PNT) to users worldwide. Unlike other
systems, it is under civilian control and has been designed to meet the diverse needs of
different user communities.
Galileo provides Europe and European citizens with independence and sovereignty for the provision of
PNT services. The Galileo system offers several high-performance services worldwide, featuring various
levels of accuracy, robustness, authentication and security:
• Open Service (OS): Galileo Full, Free and Open (FFO) service set up for positioning and timing services.
The Galileo Open Service is designed to provide Navigation Message Authentication (OSNMA), allowing
the computation of the user position using authenticated data extracted from the navigation message.
• High Accuracy Service (HAS): A free access service complementing the OS by providing free-of-
charge, high-accuracy Precise Point Positioning (PPP) corrections through the E6-B frequency band.
HAS has been offering, since January 2023, real-time user positioning performances with accuracy
down to a decimetre level in nominal conditions.
• Public Regulated Service (PRS): A service that will be restricted to government-authorised users,
designed for sensitive applications that require a high level of service continuity.
• Commercial Authentication Service (CAS): A service that will provide users with the capability to
obtain an authenticated Galileo PVT solution.
• Search and Rescue Service (SAR): Europe’s contribution to COSPAS-SARSAT, an international
satellite-based search and rescue distress alert detection system.
Galileo entered Initial Operational Capability (IOC) phase in 2016. Since then, anyone with a Galileo-
enabled device is able to use its signals for positioning, navigation and timing.
Furthermore, other services, such as Emergency Warning Satellite Service (EWSS) that will communicate
warning messages to populations facing the threat of natural disasters or other emergencies in affected
regions, are being prepared.
The Galileo infrastructure will evolve with the
arrival of the second generation of Galileo
satellites. With a gradual introduction of
cutting-edge new generation satellites in the
current fleet, several significant innovations
will be made available to Galileo users:
diversification of navigation services, by
enlarging the already excellent Galileo portfolio
with innovative services; strengthened
robustness of the satellite navigation services,
by including frequency diversity, increased
power levels, various levels of authentication;
increased accuracy in time and position,
relying on a new generation of atomic clocks
and an innovative on-board time generation
approach; use of state-of-the-art satellite
technology, including inter-satellite links and
full electric propulsion systems.
The European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service (EGNOS) is
Europe's regional satellite-based augmentation system (SBAS) that is used to
improve the performance of global navigation satellite systems (GNSSs), such
as GPS and Galileo. EGNOS improves the accuracy and reliability of GNSS positioning information, while
also providing a crucial integrity message regarding the continuity and availability of a signal. In addition,
EGNOS also transmits an extremely accurate universal time signal.
EGNOS delivers three core services:
• Open Service (OS): free and open to the public, the Open Service is used for general-purpose and
non-safety critical applications users;
• Safety of Life Service (SoL): primarily geared towards civil aviation, the SoL service has potential
applicability to a range of safety-critical transport applications which require enhanced and guaranteed
performance and an integrity warning system, including Maritime and Rail;
• EGNOS Data Access Service (EDAS): offered on a controlled access basis, it provides ground-
based access to EGNOS data through the internet to customers requiring enhanced performance for
professional use.
EGNOS has been fully operational since 2009 for OS, and 2011 for SoL, continuously delivering high-
quality services to all users with enabled receivers. The system is evolving to provide a dedicated service
for maritime users. The next EGNOS version (EGNOS V3) will also augment Galileo signals, allowing the
use of DFMC (Dual-Frequency Multi-Constellation) receivers.
For more information, please refer to the European GNSS Service Centre (GSC), which is set to be an
integral part of the European GNSS infrastructure and provides the single interface between the Galileo
system and the users.
Galileo and EGNOS – the European satnav constellations
The majority of receivers entering the market are Galileo compatible
To keep pace with the many new Galileo-compatible devices and services coming onto the
market, the European Agency for the Space Programme (EUSPA) is operating an enhanced
version of its popular UseGalileo.eu website to help users and developers keep track of Galileo-
compatible devices and services for various needs as they become available.
The increase in the use of Galileo goes hand
in hand with the wide range of Galileo-
enabled devices and services that are
continually appearing on the market. The
range of applications for Galileo is enormous,
covering both the public and private sectors
and spanning many market segments with
considerable benefits.
In addition to Galileo, the website also provides an overview of EGNOS-compatible receivers, as
well as insights into which airlines rely on EGNOS-enabled flight procedures.
© ESA
GNSS
26
MARKET OVERVIEW EUROPEAN GNSS – USERS
The bottom-up nature of Galileo and EGNOS programmes
Although one of Galileo’s main aims is to ensure European independence in terms of satellite navigation, positioning and timing services, the programme is continually developing to respond to user needs.
Ultimately, it is helping ensure that Europe keeps up with the fast-paced GNSS global landscape and provides high performances to users.
The programme was originally designed to be compatible and interoperable with GPS, GLONASS and BeiDou. Moreover, Galileo and EGNOS are able to enhance the operational domain through more accurate
and reliable positioning information, while also ensuring seamless availability and continuity of the signal.
For these reasons, Galileo and EGNOS continue to generate added value to European industry, its economy and citizens. In particular, the increased accuracy they offer through the Galileo High Accuracy
Service (HAS) provides free of charge high accuracy Precise Point Positioning (PPP) corrections through the Galileo signal (E6-B) and by terrestrial means (Internet), offering real-time improved user positioning
performances down to decimetre level. Increased accuracy can be leveraged in a wide array of market segments, for both products and services, as well as for research and development purposes. Another
important differentiator is represented by the Open Service Navigation Message Authentication (OSNMA), the data authentication function for Galileo Open Service users worldwide, freely accessible to all.
Authentication is very relevant for many applications, including transport, for autonomous vehicles in particular, and for activities with legal implications, e.g., support to the CAP in Agriculture.
EGNSS performances keep matching evolving user needs
User Consultation Platform (UCP) for the European Space Programme
continues focusing on GNSS User needs and requirements
The user consultation platform (UCP), organised by EUSPA, is a space where users from different
market segments meet to discuss their needs for applications relying on location, navigation, timing
Earth Observation and secure telecommunications.
The UCP is engaging with user communities, industries, service providers and R&D, bringing
together expertise and insights from different applications, sharing experiences and
strengthening an EU network of innovators by encouraging cooperation across broad disciplines.
The fourth edition in 2022, explored, related to GNSS, the requirements of users from across seven
market segments, namely Infrastructure, Renewable Energy and Raw Materials, Consumer
Applications, Aviation and Drones, Maritime and Fisheries, Emergency Management and
Humanitarian Aid, and Insurance and Finance. During these sessions, a range of different topics
were addressed including the exploration of GNSS applications and related operational scenarios,
user requirements, synergies with other components of the EU Space Programme, main market
trends and the evolution of the EU Space Research and Innovation.
Additionally, during the 2023 EU Space
Week in Seville, the fifth edition of the
User Consultation Platform (UCP) for
the European Space Programme has
taken place and hosted seven parallel
sessions: Agriculture and Forestry,
Environmental Climate & Biodiversity,
Rail, Public Transport, Road and
Automotive, Space, and Resilient
Societies.
Outcomes of the UCP are used to compile and update a series of Reports on User Needs and
Requirements per market segment. The objective of these documents is to constitute a reference
for each market segment’s user communities by collecting and analysing the most up-to-date GNSS
user needs and requirements of the application domains. At the same time, these reports serve
as a key input to the UCP, allowing the main included outcomes to be validated and subsequently
updated.
The full reports of the UCP User needs and requirements 2022 and 2023 are available at:
https://www.euspa.europa.eu/media-library/publications
© EUSPA, EU Space Week 2023
GNSS
27EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
MARKET DRIVERS MARKET OVERVIEW
The digital transition increasingly relies on EO and GNSS as enablers
The digital transformation increasingly forms the backbone of policymaking. This ongoing data
revolution increasingly relies on EO and GNSS. On the consumer side, we are witnessing the rise of
digital twins, the use of satellite images for game development and in support of leisure activities. In
the professional domain, uptake of AI and advanced analytics is increasing. Finance and Insurance,
among others, are good examples, as EO supports traders in better understanding and forecasting the
markets, while parametric insurance is expanding with the help of new digital applications. Also in
the area of transport, the ubiquitous presence of GNSS for asset management is necessary to support
micromobility schemes and the emerging mobility-as-a-service concept. More recently, GNSS and EO
became useful tools for a closer collaboration within the Forestry value chain, also in relation to the EU
Deforestation Regulation.
Ultimately, EO and GNSS help to meet the expectations of more aware and demanding users, who
increasingly value experiences over products.
The growing digitalisation and the use of space technologies come with challenges that cannot be
neglected, such as the need to ensure cybersecurity, for both space and ground infrastructure.
Cybersecurity is a must for both professionals, who need to ensure a smooth and safe deployment of
their activities, and individual consumers, who want to rely on safe tools for accessing information and
content while maintaining their privacy.
Climate change drives environmental awareness and increases the need for
sustainable practices across all market segments
Space technology can support a strong and effective wake-up call for environmental and climate action.
EO and GNSS have a dual function in this context.
First, they offer valuable tools for the green transition of many domains – for example, the growing
focus on sustainability by the tourism sector, especially taking advantage of the user-friendliness of
smartphone apps which make satellite-derived information simple and accessible; the planning and
management of urban areas made more efficient by EO maps; the spread of regenerative agriculture
and a more sustainable production of protein, especially from the seas; and the support to the deployment
of the circular economy providing measurements and evidence to prove that an asset is being managed
sustainably, monitoring emissions and natural capital.
Second, EO and GNSS, often combined, allow for effective assessment of the natural environment
and the anthropogenic impact on it; they support evidence-based decision making on the design of
new green policies and can be used as tools to monitor the progress of those policies. In fact, satellite-
derived data, as per the Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service (CAMS), can address a range of
crucial climate variables to be closely monitored.
Market drivers: digital transition and climate change
The market drivers presented in this section are the underlying forces behind relevant changes in the social, political, technological, economic, and cultural environment. Ultimately, they can affect de-
mand and consumption. Therefore, even if they might not be explicitly mentioned in the chapters dedicated to segments, they affect, to different extents, the uptake of EO and GNSS solutions within
the segments and applications covered in this report.
© iStock
EUSPA has published in January 2023 the EU Space for Green
Transformation report, which showcases how applications
leveraging EU space data from Copernicus, Galileo and EGNOS
can help companies become more sustainable.
Performing the green transformation requires that a company
takes a deep look through their internal operations, as well as
their supply chain to understand where and how pollution
and waste occur. In that regard, the slew of tools, including
remote sensing, location-based services, artificial intelligence
and many others makes monitoring, tracking, evaluating and
implementing sustainable operations not just possible, but
long-term profitable.
The report explains the implications of the Green Deal for
companies. It also presents detailed examples of how various
industries, including energy, road transport, aviation, agriculture,
forestry and mining, are leveraging the power of EU Space to
drive their sustainability journeys.
28
MARKET OVERVIEW MARKET DRIVERS
Economic and population growth boosts demand of space-related
downstream services
The demographic and economic growth taking place at regional level is an important driver for the
uptake of downstream space solutions.
The demographic growth, with time, will have a straightforward effect in enlarging the addressable
market for GNSS and EO solutions, directly because of the larger user base of Consumer Solutions, as
well as indirectly by boosting the demand for products and services that make use of GNSS or EO.
Even more importantly, the use of space represents an opportunity to help address the challenges
posed by demographic and economic growth (for more information on the EUSPA-UNOOSA report
please refer to page 24).
For example, population continues to increase, along with the environmental impact of human activity.
This poses challenges for food security and agriculture. GNSS and EO contribute in multiple ways to
improvements in food security, from precision farming to monitoring livestock, including fishing areas,
and thanks to the provision of early warning for famine.
Moreover, these challenges affect water management and aquatic ecosystems, as well as various
aspects related to sanitation and hygiene services. Space can contribute to water management in many
ways, such as in supporting the mapping and management of water resources and in monitoring
infrastructure.
Additionally, growing population and urbanisation go hand in hand. While urbanisation can be a catalyst
for economic growth and social and cultural development, if unmanaged it can lead to congested cities
lacking green and open spaces, and without appropriate public transport. Space can help to support
urban planning and vehicle traffic management.
Finally, population and economic growth directly impact energy demand, potentially contributing to
future carbon emissions. GNSS and EO can support in planning renewable energy plants, enabling smart
grid management and help individual users to adjust their habits with renewable energy forecasts.
Energy demand, supply chain challenges and their impact on space technologies
As the global population has grown, the use of energy has increased. However, this increase is not
commensurate since modern societies are increasingly dependent on electricity. In turn, the use of
electric power has enabled accelerated economic development, as reported by EUSPA and UNOOSA.
Currently, 91% of the world’s population has access to electricity, but only 18% of the total energy
consumption derives from renewable sources, which means that the global economy is still heavily
dependent on fossil fuels.
Events with global impact, such as the COVID-19 pandemic and Russia's invasion of Ukraine, drove up
energy prices amid shortages and uncertainty about the future, leading to higher production prices and
reduced profitability in all markets, while also limiting consumer spending.
Also, the global supply chains of raw materials and components, including semiconductors, (and
consequently GNSS chipsets), suffered major disruptions stemming from the aforementioned events.
The EU is undertaking concrete initiatives to cope with these crises. All economic domains have been
suffering from this disruption, including the Automotive sector: while the demand for cars has been on
the rise, resulting in a higher chipset demand, supply in Europe has stagnated, slowing down growth.
This is also the case for many other market segments.
The supply chain disruption, combined with low consumer consumption and market confidence, makes
it difficult to forecast the speed at which future demand will return to pre-pandemic and pre-war levels.
EO and GNSS are vital resources in identifying optimal sites for renewable energy, assessing the
energy output potential of solar and wind power plants, and assisting governmental authorities, energy
and utility companies, energy traders, supply chain managers and mining companies in undertaking
many energy-related tasks and analyses. Therefore, space-based technology can and is already
supporting the transition to renewable energy sources, which at the same time paves the way for
energy independence from geo-political dynamics. The green transition and decreased dependence on
fossil fuels are expected, in turn, to support the growth of space downstream in the long run, leading to
a virtuous cycle of market growth and increased energy sustainability.
Market drivers: growing population, energy demand and supply chain challenges
© iStock
© iStock
29EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
MARKET DRIVERS MARKET OVERVIEW
New Space entrepreneurship on the rise
The commercialisation of the Space sector, called New Space, refers to private actors playing
an increasingly important role, rather than the state monopolies of the past. Private companies are
transitioning from being simply contractors to national governments to becoming central players,
increasingly gaining the capacity and influence to actively shape the trajectory of the Space sector.
Traditionally, investors have considered the commercial opportunities of Space to be high risk and high
cost, with long payment periods. However, the barriers to entry into the Space sector have dramatically
reduced thanks to technological and commercial breakthroughs. First, standardisation, digitalisation
and miniaturisation of technology allowed for the reduction of size, weight and production costs of
satellites, which are the key drivers of launch costs. Following this increased efficiency, the Space sector
began to have a deeper impact on the whole economy, encouraging companies to build upon existing
space-based systems to develop new capabilities serving an ever-expanding array of commercial
downstream markets.
With the growing presence of smaller entities in the sector, innovation will occur at a more rapid
pace as these companies are more agile and innovative than traditional players. They are therefore
challenging the status quo and fostering even more technological breakthroughs, especially in terms of
sustainability. In fact, these smaller ventures are leading the shift towards greener space technologies
and more environmentally friendly space solutions.
With a strong legacy of space excellence, Europe has the potential to become a centre for New Space
companies. European countries have already started rolling out strategies not only to attract private
European companies but also foreign ones. Moreover, similar to the US, venture capital firms are also
prominent investors in the European New Space segment.
In addition, the CASSINI initiative is also boosting the EU entrepreneurial fabric in many ways. The
following box offers further details.
Market drivers: new space entrepreneurship
Space entrepreneurial initiative: CASSINI
CASSINI is the European Commission's initiative to support entrepreneurs, start-ups and SMEs in
the Space industry, including New Space, during 2021-2027. The initiative is open to all areas of the
EU Space Programme and covers both upstream (i.e. nanosats, launchers, etc.) and downstream (i.e.,
products/services enabled by space data, etc.). CASSINI comprises a €1 billion EU seeds and growth
fund, hackathons and mentoring, prizes, a business accelerator, partnering and matchmaking,
empowering entrepreneurs to grow their businesses and reach new heights.
In more detail, the CASSINI Hackathons facilitate participants to apply their skills to address global
challenges using EU space technologies; the CASSINI Matchmaking offers a platform for start-
ups, scaleups, and SMEs to connect with corporates and investors to solve business challenges
and address global needs; and the CASSINI Business Accelerator provides intensive acceleration
programmes for top space start-ups and scale-ups to boost their commercial growth. Lastly, the EU
Space Academy serves as a go-to source of know-how on space for entrepreneurs.
Enhancing collaboration between space technologies and the media
In line with the technological advancements in the Space sector, information deriving from space
technology is becoming increasingly accessible and visible to the wider public. On top of the
efforts made by national and regional space agencies in maintaining webpages to report on their
activities and breakthroughs, a new emerging trend concerns the use of satellite products by the
news. Therefore, citizens are becoming increasingly familiar with satellite images, and this new
line of business is offering opportunities for private companies that can support journalists and
publicists with effective communication tools.
Many companies are taking this chance to expand their portfolios and differentiate their clients.
For example, Maxar has launched the Maxar News Bureau, which combines space technology
and journalism under a partnership programme with trusted media organisations. As a leading
provider of satellite imagery and space-based analytics, the Maxar News Bureau leverages
Maxar’s position in the sector to provide a wide range of geospatial coverage to the general
public. In turn, this allows the reporting of detailed and up-to-date information on various topics,
such as natural disasters, geopolitical crises and
climate change.
Other space companies are also engaging in
such partnerships. For instance, Planet Labs, as
shown on its News and Press webpage, often
collaborates with large news outlets by providing
insights from its satellite imagery capabilities,
covering diverse topics and areas. Similarly,
BlackSky also supplies its satellite imageries to
media companies, providing more context and
enriching news reporting.
© ESA
The CASSINI Challenges
(formerly #myEUspace
Competition) are another
example of the provision
of support to creative
innovators in developing groundbreaking commercial solutions
leveraging on Galileo and Copernicus, providing resources to
scale up their businesses and launch their products globally.
For more information and open opportunities, please refer to
the official webpage or sign up via the QR code below.
30
MARKET OVERVIEW EO MARKET TRENDS
Environmental, Climate and Biodiversity considerations drive measuring,
monitoring and reporting needs in most segments
Stakeholders in all segments are taking steps to reduce their impact on the Environment, Climate and
Biodiversity, and to account for climate risks. Various actors across the value chain have committed to
climate neutrality goals, often accelerated by legislation and regulation, while others started reporting
on climate risk assessments.
Measuring, monitoring and reporting on various Environmental, Climate and Biodiversity indicators
can leverage insights generated by satellite imagery. Upcoming satellite missions such as CHIME and
CO2M will generate data that are particularly useful for this purpose.
Today in-orbit sensors already provide important emission-related insights, for example by enabling
the comparison of actual methane emissions with those reported nationally. It is these kinds of insights
that allow stakeholders in various segments to monitor performance of supply chains against legal
or quality standards, assess total carbon footprint, or evaluate the effectiveness of climate policies.
Additionally, it is foreseen that multiple segments will increasingly rely on EO data to provide important
information on biodiversity indicators. For example, EO insights such as habitat identification and wetland
classification can support ecosystem conservation efforts. Such insights are also useful for the selection of
sites for new renewable energy projects, with a view to minimising impact on the environment.
The industry sees increased vertical integration in the downstream segment,
including non-space companies investing in EO capabilities
Vertical integration is becoming increasingly common in the EO industry. It has been prevalent primarily
in the upstream segment, where companies choose to control the entirety of the Space segment,
including the design, manufacturing, launch and operations of satellite constellations.
More recently, vertical integration has been applied in the downstream segment, where satellite data
providers choose to acquire data platform companies to improve their product delivery (e.g. Maxar’s
2022 acquisition of Wovenware to increase its 3D production capabilities) or go a step further and
acquire analytics companies serving specific segments to immediately get a foothold in the market (e.g.
Planet’s acquisition of Vandersat and Salo Sciences).
Additionally, backward integration, in which companies choose to invest in EO capabilities to address
specific needs within the organisation, is an emerging trend. Examples include Hitachi’s Vegetation
Manager and Husqvarna’s Intellion, both vegetation monitoring tools. ExxonMobil and Tomorrow.io have
announced similar plans to develop EO capabilities.
In-orbit sensor capabilities and diversity continue to increase, improving EO
data-enabled service offerings in various segments
Satellite data providers, old and new, continue to dedicate significant resources to improving and
expanding their satellite data offerings.
Such improvements include increased spatial resolution, such as Airbus Pléiades Neo constellation and
the Maxar’s new Legion constellation targeting a 30cm ground sampling distance (GSD), while others
focus on increasing sensor diversity, such as Planet, Wyvern, PIXXEL, OroraTech, or on launching
satellites equipped with novel hyperspectral and thermal infrared sensors. Similarly, public missions
such as EnMap (and future CHIME) significantly increase the amount of hyperspectral data available
for various applications.
The increased availability of hyperspectral data enables multiple applications in different segments. In
the Raw Materials segment, such data sources will greatly benefit mineral exploration activities. In
Forestry, tree species can be classified more accurately. In Agriculture, hyperspectral data is better
suited for the early detection of diseases than (traditionally more ubiquitous) multispectral data, while in
the Urban Planning and Environment segments, hyperspectral data can play an important role in the
monitoring of air quality (particulate and gaseous). The Emergency Management and Humanitarian
Aid segment equally benefits from new sensors, such as thermal infrared, which can support the early
detection of forest fires.
EO cross-segment market trends: while environmental priorities drive the demand,
the industry undergoes vertical integration and improves its data offering
Key market trends in Earth Observation
• Stakeholders across all segments are taking steps to reduce their environmental impact, driving the use of EO for measuring, monitoring and reporting needs.
• A growing number of satellite data providers is acquiring data platform companies, increasing the vertical integration in the downstream part of the market, including non-space companies investing
in EO capabilities.
• Satellite sensor capabilities and diversity continues to increase improving and expanding their satellite data offerings through increased spatial resolution and sensors diversity.
©ESA, S2 image of Rhodos
EO
31EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
Key market trends in GNSS
• Advancements in automation boost the relevance of GNSS solutions, offering increased efficiency and safety.
• Increased attention to healthier lifestyle is pushing the demand of digital technologies and GNSS, especially concerning physical activity and food quality and traceability.
• Safety is an important driver of innovation in GNSS, both at application and service level, involving both both commercial and public providers of satellite services and solutions in transport, across
air, sea and land.
GNSS MARKET TRENDS MARKET OVERVIEW
The rise of automation strengthens the role of GNSS
The past few years have seen the spread of automation into nearly every industry and sector. Industry
analysts say that this trend will continue, if not accelerate, enabled by the increasing maturity of
technological enablers such as Artificial Intelligence, robotics and innovations in computing.
The upscaling of automation is due to its vast potential to transform these industries by making them
smarter, more efficient and sustainable. The rise of automation is affecting nearly every industrial
sector, including transport, via unmanned road vehicles, vessels, trains and drones; and Agriculture,
Logistics and Construction and Urban Development.
As autonomous vehicles, robots and machinery interact with the environment and with humans, the safety
of their operation is essential. This in turn impacts the demand and requirements for satellite navigation
technologies, in terms not only of higher accuracy but also increased robustness and availability.
Such a trend has been driving a new wave of innovation in the provision of augmentation services, with
the industry developing new networks and signing partnership agreements to make turnkey solutions
available for their customers.
Healthy lifestyle boost the demand for GNSS solutions
From a societal and global perspective, the increase in population age presents both challenges and
opportunities. In addition to longevity alone, the COVID-19 pandemic alerted many citizens across the
globe of the importance of healthier lifestyles.
The health, fitness and wellbeing and food sectors, among others, have been impacted by this trend –
consumers are making more educated choices on what they eat – in terms of healthy products, based
on environmental and treatment practices – where they live – becoming more sensitive to pollution
– and how, by changing their lifestyle, to remain active.
While the increased attention to food quality and traceability is pushing the demand of digital
technologies – including GNSS – along the relevant value chains in Agriculture and Aquaculture, higher
awareness of the consequences of pollution has increased social acceptance of climate-friendly policies
in mobility, energy and transport, which supported by space technologies including satellite navigation.
Finally, the demand for fitness devices and wearables has supported innovation and market growth in
Consumer Solutions and driven industry convergence on wearables, with GNSS specialist companies
now competing with wellbeing device specialists, mobile phone manufacturers and sportswear giants.
Safety needs and requirements drive GNSS adoption and innovation
Safety considerations have a multifaceted impact on GNSS adoption and innovation. First and foremost,
the need to save lives across different domains has been supporting the development of dedicated
GNSS applications to accurately locate emergency calls (E112), help mitigate the consequences of road
incidents (eCall), and locate people in distress through several types of GNSS-enabled locator beacons.
Second, the demanding performance requirements of several safety critical GNSS applications
are driving innovation by both commercial and public providers of satellite services and solutions in
transport, across air, sea and land.
Leading GNSS players have started offering end-to-end safe GNSS solutions, from correction services
to on-board positioning engines, in order to meet the safety performance requirements established by
relevant transport standards.
At the same time, public GNSS providers and operators, led by the EU, are upgrading their services to
meet segment specific requirements. This is true for the unique Return Link Service that was developed
as part of Galileo SAR service (see page 86 and 89), as well as for the upcoming EGNOS maritime service,
which was designed to meet the integrity requirements of the maritime community (see page 148).
GNSS cross-segment market trends: automation, growing attention to health and
new safety requirements trigger the demand for more and better GNSS solutions
GNSS Investment Report by EUSPA and EIB highlights the role of investment
funding to sustain industry growth
The EU Agency for the Space Programme (EUSPA) and the European Investment Bank (EIB) have
published the first issue of the GNSS Investment Report. The report features a comprehensive
investment analysis of the GNSS market, complemented by the analysis of the dynamics of the sector
overall. The report also outlines the current state of play regarding available public and private funding
and identifies needs and funding gaps for GNSS companies and start-ups in the European Union.
The report suggests that, while Europe still holds a competitive position in
the global landscape of downstream GNSS-enabled products and services,
significant public and private investment will be necessary over the
next 10 years to enable European manufacturers and providers to remain
competitive and afford relying on domestic suppliers.
As well as analysing the landscape and trends on investment funding from the
demand and supply perspectives, the report provides recommendations on
supporting future EU competitiveness in the GNSS downstream market.
GNSS
HOT TOPICS HIGHLIGHT
32
MARKET OVERVIEW
What you should not miss in this report…
AVIATION AND
DRONES
U-space regulation will boost
GNSS adoption in drones
via Electronic Conspicuity
devices (pages 49
and 50)
FISHERIES AND
AQUACULTURE
GNSS and EO improve
the productivity of the
industry and the monitoring
capabilities of
authorities (pages 107
and 108)
EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT AND
HUMANITARIAN AID
Galileo differentiators
and Copernicus services
improve emergency
management
(pages 86, 87 and 89)
FORESTRY
Forest monitoring,
preservation and
regeneration needs, along
with trafficability assessment,
strengthen the demand
for EO (pages 118
and 119)
CLIMATE,
ENVIRONMENT
AND BIODIVERSITY
Demand for specialised
risk modelling and climate
resilience is driving the
uptake of climate-related
EO products (pages 60
and 61)
AGRICULTURE
GNSS automatic
steering is growing
in popularity, paving
the way for the advent
of robotics (pages 35,
38 and 39)
CONSUMER
SOLUTIONS,
TOURISM AND HEALTH
As the smartphone device
market becomes more mature,
space-enabled apps will
drive market growth
(pages 74, 75 and 76)
ENERGY AND RAW
MATERIALS
The digitalisation of the mining
business is driving adoption
of GNSS and EO
(pages 98 and 101)
Photos © iStock
MARKET OVERVIEW
33EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
HOT TOPICS HIGHLIGHT
INSURANCE AND
FINANCE
From green bonds to ESG,
EO supports the green
transition in Insurance
and Finance
(page 138)
URBAN
DEVELOPMENT AND
CULTURAL HERITAGE
EO is supporting both
urban development
and cultural heritage
management (pages
183 and 184)
ROAD AND
AUTOMOTIVE
The race of the Automotive
industry toward automation
is driving innovation
in GNSS positioning
(pages 165 and 166)MARITIME
AND INLAND
WATERWAYS
GNSS and EO will support
autonomous vessels
introduction across
oceans, seas and rivers
(pages 149 and 150)
INFRASTRUCTURE
Increasing awareness of
how EO can support the
infrastructure lifecycle will
increase market size
(pages 129 and 131)
RAIL
Asset management
solutions drive GNSS
growth in Rail
(pages 160 and 161)
SPACE
Mega constellations
deployment means
larger demand for
GNSS positioning
(page 178)
Photos © iStock
AGRICULTURE
34
AGRICULTURE
The use of digital technologies in farm management and across the agricultural sector
as a whole is helping to address several farm- and sector-level challenges for farmers,
agricultural cooperatives, key decision makers and governments. This ultimately helps
to improve farm profitability, address resource-use efficiency and contribute to our
sustainability goals.
At an individual level, EO allows farmers to remotely monitor crop performance and
reduce their usage of inputs such as fertilisers. At the macro level, EO provides vast
amounts of rich data which public authorities and economists can use to better inform
their analysis and decision making.
GNSS delivers huge value to the sector by helping farmers to guide machinery and track
their livestock, ensuring farm operations remain as efficient as possible.
Together, EO and GNSS allow stakeholders to better understand the sector, efficiently
address its needs and help in guiding it towards a sustainable future.
What you can read in this chapter
• Key trends: FAO’s Global Information and Early Warning System, Regenerative
Agriculture and GNSS-enabled robots delivering value to the agricultural sector.
• User perspective: Significant progress has been made on converging EO and GNSS
value propositions to user needs.
• Industry: Agriculture Value Chains.
• Recent developments: Eco-schemes and Artificial Intelligence shaping how we
produce food.
• Future market evolution: Frontier tech continuing to disrupt the market.
• Focus on European Systems: The European space programme supports R&D activities
in agriculture.
• Reference charts: Yearly evolution of installed base of GNSS devices and revenues as
well as EO revenues by application and region.
© pixabay.com
Application descriptions can be found in Annex 3.Environmental Monitoring
• Carbon capture & content assessment
• Environmental impact monitoringWeather Services for Agriculture
• Climate services for agriculture
• Weather forecasting for agricultureOperations Management
• Asset monitoring
• Automatic steering
• CAP monitoring
• Farm machinery guidance
• Farm management systems
• Field definition
• Livestock wearables
• Pastureland management
• Precision irrigation
• Variable rate applicationNatural Resources Monitoring
• Biomass monitoring
• Crop yield forecasting
• Soil condition monitoring
• Vegetation monitoringLegend
EO application
GNSS application
Synergetic application
(combined use of EO and GNSS)
AGRICULTURE35EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
KEY TRENDS
FAO’s Global Information and Early Warning System, Regenerative Agriculture
and GNSS-enabled robots delivering value to the agricultural sector
Monitoring Regenerative Agriculture using Earth Observation
Regenerative agriculture is a term that is becoming increasingly common. It represents a holistic
approach to how we produce our food that encompasses several key principles, including minimising
soil disturbance, enhancing crop diversity, maintaining soil cover, and integrating grazing animals
into the agricultural landscape. The role of satellite imagery in validating various aspects of regenerative
farming is both vital and multifaceted. Firstly, by analysing spectral characteristics, satellites can identify
different types of cover crops, offering valuable insights into their presence and health. EO data also
possess the capability to identify tillage practices by observing the presence or absence of plant residue
on the soil's surface. They can also pinpoint abrupt changes in soil texture and roughness, providing a
means of monitoring soil disturbance and conservation efforts.
Moreover, crop rotation, a fundamental component of biodiversity in regenerative agriculture, can be
verified using satellite imagery. The technology allows for the differentiation of various crop types based
on their unique spectral signatures, facilitating the assessment of crop rotation practices. Finally, the
presence of grazing cattle on cropland can be discerned through satellite observations. Their direct
impact on vegetation status, especially following intensive or rotational grazing, is evident in changes
detected in vegetation cover. Incorporating EO data into regenerative farming practices enables a
comprehensive, data-driven approach to assessing and enhancing the implementation of regenerative
principles, contributing to a sustainable and thriving future for agriculture.
GNSS-enabled autonomous harvesting, weeding and planting robots and
drones becoming a more common sight
GNSS technology is ushering in a new era where drones and robots are taking on increasingly complex
tasks in agriculture. Autonomous machines are gaining adoption in the sector. In many developed
countries, particularly within the horticulture sector, these robots are increasingly used for harvesting
activities, such as fruit or vegetable picking. Weeding has long been a strenuous task for farmers, and
here, too, robots offer a compelling alternative to manual labour. Robots can efficiently manage weed
control, reducing the physical burden on farmers. In recent years, engineers have pushed the boundaries of
robotics even further, enabling machines to undertake intricate tasks like planting and seeding.
Several companies have developed sophisticated robots and drones that harness the power of AI and
machine learning to perform these activities with precision and efficiency. Robots and drones are also
proving their worth in crop management by applying farming inputs such as pesticides and herbicides.
Coupling robots and drones with smart and selective application methods can help reduce the overall
use of these inputs, promoting more sustainable farming practices. According to Mordor Intelligence’s
2023-2028 outlook, the future looks promising for the agricultural robotics market, with an estimated
valuation of €12.3 billion in 2023, set to surge to €22.8 billion within the next five years. This growth
underscores the transformative potential of technology in modernising and enhancing agriculture.
FAO’s GIEWS – Continual integration of Earth Observation data into globally
significant early warning system
Established as a response to the food crises in the early 1970s, the Global Information and Early Warning
System on Food and Agriculture (GIEWS) plays a vital role in safeguarding global food security. Its mission
revolves around the continuous monitoring of crucial indicators, such as food supply and demand around the
world. GIEWS issues regular and unbiased reports, shedding light on prevailing conditions and providing early
warnings of potential food crises at regional and country levels. Recently, GIEWS has embraced cutting-
edge Earth Observation data and revolutionary technologies, crucially including Copernicus data. This
has led to enhanced services, facilitating more robust monitoring of major food crops worldwide and enabling
precise assessments of production prospects. This invaluable resource provides insights into critical aspects,
such as water availability and vegetation health during essential cropping seasons. Key data sets, such as
rainfall estimates and the widely recognised Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), bolster its
monitoring and forecasting capabilities. A significant milestone in this journey of improvement has been
the collaborative development of the Agricultural Stress Index (ASI) alongside FAO's OCB Division. The ASI
serves as a quick-look indicator, enabling early identification of agricultural areas vulnerable to dry spells and
severe droughts. Prompt recognition empowers stakeholders to intervene in a timely manner, implementing
measures to mitigate the impact on agricultural productivity and overall food security.
Key market trends
• FAO’s Global Information and Early Warning System on Food and Agriculture (GIEWS) is providing valuable information to agricultural stakeholders all around the world
• Regenerative Agriculture is a holistic approach to sustainable farming practices and is growing in popularity, with several relevant EO and GNSS applications
• Autonomous robots in farming applications are an increasingly common sight thanks to GNSS
© pexels.com
36AGRICULTURER E P O R T O N A G R I C U LT U R E U S E R N E E D S A N D R E Q U I R E M E N T S 1
USER PERSPECTIVE
Sources of key EO and GNSS user requirements
The key EO and GNSS user requirements for the different application groups within the agriculture segment are collected using a harmonised procedure at EU level.
Information is collected through extensive interactions with user groups, providers and experts in a continuous process culminating at the User Consultation Platforms (UCP).
All relevant requirements are documented in detail and updated regularly within the Report on Agriculture and Forestry user needs and requirements. User requirements for
Earth Observation services and products – as well as their evolution – are now also collected through the UCP. The process covers the EO user needs and requirements of
commercial users based on inputs from industry experts and user groups, mirroring the existing process implemented for GNSS. The report featuring EO user requirements
was validated in 2023 and will be available in early 2024. The report also includes the user requirements for Forestry applications.
Moreover, the collection of specific requirements for Copernicus services and products is supported by an integrated process that involves different channels: (i) dedicated
studies (e.g. "NEXTSPACE" project, "Copernicus for EC (C4EC)" study, Commission Staff Working Document on user needs); (ii) targeted consultations organised by the
European Commission or the entrusted entities with the relevant communities; and (iii) regular and structured exchanges among representatives of the Copernicus governance
structure and Member States through the Copernicus User Forum.
Significant progress has been made on converging
EO and GNSS value propositions to user needs
Integrated Pest Management key to farmers reducing pesticide use
It is an ongoing challenge for farmers to deal with the threat that pests pose to their crops while
simultaneously trying to manage pesticide use efficiently. Integrated Pest Management (IPM) is
a farming approach which aims to address pest issues, while minimising potential risks to both
people and the environment.
IPM takes an ecosystem-centred strategy that focuses on preventing damage from pests
over the long term. This prevention is achieved through a combination of techniques, including
biological control, altering habitats, adjusting cultural practices and employing resistant crop
varieties. In respect of the application of pesticides, IPM ensures that they are selected and used in
a manner that reduces any potential harm to humans, non-target organisms and the environment.
The integration of EO and GNSS technologies is therefore crucial. By combining EO data with
GNSS solutions for variable-rate pesticide application, farmers can create detailed crop maps and
precisely position their spraying equipment, leading to reduced pesticide usage.
In Europe, as part of the Green Deal initiative, the European Commission has set a goal to
cut pesticide usage in half by 2030. Farmers face the challenge of maintaining agricultural
output while decreasing the use of certain farming inputs. The adoption of IPM practices and
the incorporation of EO and GNSS solutions can be instrumental in helping farmers achieve this
challenging but environmentally responsible objective.
Farm Management Systems – an all-in-one solution for farmers
Simultaneously managing all farm operations can be an extremely demanding job, but a Farm
Management System (FMS) can ease the burden on farmers. An FMS is a digital tool or software
package designed to comprehensively optimise and oversee farm operations and production
activities.
This software automates various farm tasks, including record-keeping, financial management,
data storage and various types of operational analysis relating to farming activities. It also
helps streamline production processes and work schedules. FMS solutions are tailored to meet
the specific requirements of individual farms, as each operation has its unique set of activities.
Most FMSs incorporate EO and/or GNSS data into their workflows. This integration allows
farmers to visualise and track various aspects of farm processes, such as crop growth and input
usage. FMS is gaining popularity among farmers, with numerous commercial options available on
the market. Nevertheless, the interoperability of farming equipment with these systems is a
common challenge due to the different digital standards applied.
This lack of interoperability can sometimes obstruct the adoption of FMS, which limits increases
in production efficiency through smart farming methods. However, when implemented correctly,
FMS can deliver a range of benefits, including cost reduction, increased yields, improved yield
quality, enhanced profitability and decreased operational risks.
AGRICULTURE37EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
INDUSTRY
END USERS
SYSTEM INTEGRATORS
DESIGN CONSULTANCIES
TESTING & MAINTENANCE
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and
European companies involved in GNSS and EO
downstream activities. Please note that enterprises
listed in the data providers step of the value chain
often provide platforms as a service. For the sake of
simplicity the data providers are not repeated in other
stages of the value chain in which they are active.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as
EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 13 and 23 for a comprehensive
description of value chains and how
to interpret them at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined
with respect to the headquarters of the company,
though the actual area of activity might be wider.
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
END USERS
INFORMATION
PROVIDERS
EO PRODUCTS AND
SERVICE PROVIDERS
PLATFORM
PROVIDERS
INFRASTRUCTURE
PROVIDERS
DATA PROVIDERS
• CNH INDUSTRIAL*
• DEERE
• FUGRO*
• HEMISPHERE (ATLAS)
• HEXAGON*
• SAPCORDA*
• SWIFT
• TERIA*
• TOPCON
• TRIMBLE
• AG LEADER TECHNOLOGY
• AGJUNCTION
• ANALOG DEVICES
• ANTCOM
• ARAG*
• AVMAP*
• BEIJING BDSTAR NAVIGATION
• CAMPBELL SCIENTIFIC
• CHCNAV
• CNH INDUSTRIAL*
• COMNAV TECHNOLOGY
• DEERE
• HARXON
• HEXAGON*
• MEINBERG*
• RAVEN INDUSTRIES
• SEPTENTRIO*
• TOPCON CORPORATION
• TRIMBLE NAVIGATION
• UNISTRONG GNSS
• YAGEO
• ADAM*
• CLOUDEO*
• CREODIAS*
• EARTH-I*
• EDS CEODE
• EURODATACUBE*
• GOOGLE EARTH ENGINE
• NORTH.IO*
• OPEN DATA CUBE
• PLANET EXPLORER
• SENTINEL-HUB* (SINERGISE)
• TERRADUE*
• UP42*
• AG LEADER TECHNOLOGY
• AGCO CORP
• AMAZONEN-WERKE*
• ARAG*
• AVMAP*
• CLAAS KGAA*
• CHCNAV
• CNH INDUSTRIAL*
• DAEDONG INDUSTRIAL
• DEERE
• HEXAGON*
• ISEKI & CO
• JCB*
• KRONE*
• KUBOTA CORPORATION
• MAHINDRA
• MILLAT TRACTORS
• SDF GROUP*
• TONGYANG MOOLSAN
• YANMAR
• AGRICOLUS*
• BASF*
• CLEVERFARM*
• DESCARTES LABS
• DIGIFARM*
• E-GEOS*
• EARTH DAILY
• EOS DATA ANALYTICS
• FARMSTAR
• FIELDSENSE*
• GAF*
• GEOVILLE*
• GMV*
• KAPPAZETA*
• ONESOIL*
• PESSL INSTRUMENTS*
• PLANETEK*
• SATAGRO*
• SATELLIGENCE*
• SENCROP*
• SINERGISE
• TALKINGFIELDS*
• TRIMBLE
• VITO*
• VULTUS*
FARM MANAGEMENT
SERVICES:
• 365FARMNET*
• AGRIVI*
• AGWORLD
• CROPWISE
• FARMERP
• GRANULAR
SECTOR SPECIFIC SERVICES:
• GAMAYA* (SOY, SUGAR
CANE)
• GEO4A* (POTATO)
• AGRI-INSURERS
• AGRICULTURAL
CONSULTANTS
• AGROCHEMICAL
MANUFACTURERS
• AGRONOMISTS
• COOPERATIVES
• ENVIRONMENTAL AGENCIES
• FARMERS
• FOOD PROCESSORS
• INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
(E.G. FAO, WFP…)
• PAYING AGENCIES
• WINE PRODUCERS
• AGRI-INSURERS
• AGRICULTURAL CONSULTANTS
• AGROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURERS
• AGRONOMISTS
• COOPERATIVES
• ENVIRONMENTAL AGENCIES
• FARMERS / CONTRACTORS
• FOOD PROCESSORS
• INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
(E.G. FAO, WFP…)
• PAYING AGENCIES
• WINE PRODUCERS
EARTH
OBSERVATION
COMPONENT AND
RECEIVER MANUFACTURERS
AUGMENTATION
SERVICE PROVIDERS
GNSS
• AWS
• CLOUDFERRO*
• GOOGLE CLOUD PLATFORM
• IBM CLOUD
• MICROSOFT AZURE
• T-SYSTEMS*
• FEDERATED
INFRASTRUCTURE (E.G.
GAIA-X)*
• SENTINEL COLLABORATIVE
GROUND SEGMENT*
• NATIONAL AND REGIONAL
RTK NETWORK PROVIDERS
• AIRBUS*
• BLACKSKY
• CAPELLA SPACE
• GEOSAT*
• E-GEOS*
• EARTH-I*
• EOS DATA ANALYTICS*
• ICEYE*
• MAXAR
• PLANET
• SATELLOGIC*
• UMBRA
• COPERNICUS SENTINELS*
• LANDSAT (USGS)
• METEOSAT (EUMETSAT)*
• RADARSAT (CSA)
• RELEVANT EUROPEAN
NATIONAL MISSIONS
• RELEVANT IN-SITU
NETWORKS
• COPERNICUS DATASPACE
ECOSYSTEM*
• FOOD TEP*
• WEKEO*
• COPERNICUS CLIMATE
CHANGE SERVICE (C3S)*
• COPERNICUS LAND
MONITORING SERVICE (CLMS)*
Agriculture Value Chains 1
The European2 EO and GNSS
industry in the global arena
While North America dominates
the EO data processing and analysis
market, European companies account
for around half of the analysis, insight
and decision support global market
share. The biggest European
companies across the value chain are
BASF and Leonardo (e-GEOS).
European companies such as Hexagon,
CNH, Septentrio, Arag and Avmap
have a combined total of around one
tenth of the total agriculture GNSS
component and receiver market,
the vast majority of which is held by
Hexagon alone.
38AGRICULTURE
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Shipments of GNSS receivers have grown continually and strongly over the past decade, rising from
almost 200 000 units shipped across all applications in 2012 to close to 1.4 million units shipped
annually.
While farm machinery guidance was the dominant application until 2016, automatic steering has now
the largest market share due to the increasing popularity of advanced steering systems. In 2021 and
2022, automatic steering accounted for over 400 000 units shipped worldwide annually.
The growing appeal of automated steering systems can be attributed to their ability to enhance
machinery control and support the efficient application of farming inputs like fertilisers and pesticides.
Farm machinery guidance accounted for over 400 000 shipments worldwide in 2022, with variable
rate application shipments accounting for just over 200 000 units. In the same year, shipments for
asset management reached just under 100 000 units.
Eco-schemes and Artificial Intelligence shaping how we produce food
EO and GNSS empowering Artificial Intelligence developments in agri-food
Both EO and GNSS offer a wealth of valuable datasets for the agricultural sector. There is a growing
interest in harnessing the power of Artificial Intelligence (AI) within the agri-food sector to extract and
leverage the insights contained within these datasets.
For example, AI can enhance predictions of crop yields by analysing data collected from EO and/or GNSS
sources and integrating it into other datasets.
AI can simplify plant phenotyping, automate the detection of pests or pathogens, ensure consistent
product quality throughout the production cycle, and support strategic decisions on time-to-market
planning.
Consequently, AI has the potential to optimise farm operations, boost economic returns for growers and
promote sustainable agricultural practices.
CAP Strategic Plans define how eco-schemes ensure agriculture remains
green
The new Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) embraces a performance and results-based approach,
offering increased flexibility while considering local conditions and needs. EU Member States must
draw up their own CAP Strategic Plan under this approach. One noteworthy addition to the CAP is
the introduction of eco-schemes, which are strategically designed to align with Europe's climate
objectives.
These eco-schemes constitute an integral part of each CAP Strategic Plan and are defined by each
Member State. The implementation of EO and GNSS technologies plays a pivotal role in simplifying the
monitoring, reporting and verification of eco-schemes.
Eco-schemes encompass a variety of initiatives, including the rewetting of wetlands and peatlands,
the development of nutrient management plans employing innovative methods to reduce nutrient
release, optimising pH levels for nutrient uptake and fostering circular agriculture. Additionally, they
involve precision crop farming to minimise inputs like fertilisers, water and plant protection products, as
well as the creation and enhancement of semi-natural habitats.
The integration of EO and GNSS solutions into the management of eco-schemes not only enhances their
efficiency but also contributes to the advancement of sustainable agricultural practices, aligning with the
overarching objectives of the CAP.
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
Farm machinery guidance Automatic Steering
Variable rate application Asset monitoring
AGRICULTURE39EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
Revenues from EO data and service sales across all agricultural applications are expected to increase
from almost €450 million in 2023 to around €670 million in 2033.
In this new edition of the report two new applications have been quantified: carbon capture and content
assessment; and environmental impact monitoring of farming. These inclusions reflect the increasing
focus on the impact of agricultural activities on the environment.
Currently, the three largest applications in terms of market share are vegetation monitoring, crop yield
forecasting and variable rate application. Combined, they were forecast to achieved revenue of over
€256 million in 2023 and are projected to reach more than €400 million by 2033. Soil condition
monitoring and precision irrigation also boast substantial market shares across the decade.
Vegetation monitoring is expected to retain the largest market share over the next decade, not only
due to the value it can bring to farmers, but also due to the rich information it can provide to other
stakeholders in the agricultural value chain, including governmental bodies and economists concerned
with the maintenance and monitoring of food supply chains.
Frontier tech continuing to disrupt the market
“Swarm” robotics could change the face of precision agriculture
Recent developments in smart agriculture, which have primarily revolved around the adoption of large
machinery, have aimed to maximise output while minimising costs. However, this approach has raised
both economic and environmental concerns.
A potentially transformative future trend involves the deployment of "swarms" of smaller, GNSS-
enabled drones, robots and UAVs to optimise agricultural operations. By applying swarm intelligence
approaches within agricultural robotics, the synchronised efforts of multiple robots working in cooperation
can produce impactful operational efficiencies. This approach holds particular promise for agricultural
activities that are labour and time intensive. Swarm robotics has the potential to automatically divide
and delegate tasks among the swarm, thereby performing several tasks in parallel and reducing the
need for human planning and labour.
Furthermore, for the likes of harvesting activities, these robots can be programmed to discern and
avoid harvesting unripe plants, thereby enhancing efficiency and overall yield. Another critical aspect of
agriculture that can benefit from swarm robotics is soil monitoring. These robots can be programmed to
measure crucial parameters such as soil temperature, moisture levels and nutrient content. Subsequently,
they can relay this data back to farmers, enabling them to make more informed decisions about crop
management strategies.
Digital twins in agriculture
A ‘digital twin’ is a digital replica of a real-world object that mirrors its behaviour and states throughout
its lifecycle within a virtual environment. Leveraging digital twins within farm management allows
the separation of physical processes from their planning and control.
Consequently, activities can be remotely overseen and based on real-time or near-real-time digital data
rather than relying solely on direct on-site observation and manual tasks. Although still very much in
its early phases, this capability could empower farmers to respond promptly to expected or unexpected
deviations and to simulate the outcomes of interventions using real-world data. EO and GNSS data are
considered invaluable sources of information for creating these digital replicas with the highest possible
accuracy.
The application of digital twins within the livestock farming sector also has the potential to be used
to improve large-scale precision livestock farming practices. In this approach, the health, behaviour,
distress and disease control and prevention of a variety of farm animals can be better understood.
In a broader context, comprehensive digital twins, encompassing greenhouse replicas, the physical
environment and crop replicas, serve as valuable tools for making operational and tactical management
decisions, shaping strategic design choices, and providing insights for predictive maintenance.
By simulating and evaluating preventive and corrective actions within the digital environment before
implementing them in the physical world, these holistic digital twins could, in the future, offer a robust
framework for capturing existing knowledge and generating artificial training datasets to inform future
system design and operation.
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application
Vegetation monitoring Biomass monitoring Soil condition monitoring
Crop yield forecating Variable rate application Precision irrigation
CAP monitoring Field definition Carbon capture & content assessment
Environmental impact monitoring Pastureland management
Vegetation monitoring Biomass monitoring Soil condition monitoring
Crop yield forecating Variable rate application Precision irrigation
CAP monitoring Field definition Carbon capture & content assessment
Environmental impact monitoring Pastureland management
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
40AGRICULTURE
EUROPEAN SYSTEMS & PROJECTS
The European space programme supports R&D activities in agriculture
Weather and irrigation information for farmers - MAGDA
MAGDA will improve farm-specific weather forecasts as well as irrigation advisories which will
proactively contribute to protecting crops from severe weather impacts, decreasing both food
production losses due to adverse weather, but also water consumption due to mismanaged irrigation.
MAGDA is contributing to the Sustainable Development Goal 12 (“Ensure sustainable
consumption and production patterns”) and 13 (“Climate Action”), as well as to the EU´s
Common Agricultural Policy (CAP).
More information available at: https://www.magdaproject.eu
Digital platform for agro-advisory and business services - PestNu
PestNu aims to revolutionise novel, digital and space-based technologies (DST) with agro-
ecological and organic practices (AOP) in a systemic approach which can be applied in novel
circular economy food production – e.g. aquaponics, hydroponic greenhouses and open-field
vegetable cultivation.
It aims to reduce the dependence on hazardous pesticides, reduce the loss of nutrients from
fertilisers and progress towards zero pollution of water, soil and air.
More information available at: https://pestnu.eu
Trusted and green traceability through EU space technologies - SPACE4GREEN
The SPACE4GREEN project will develop a technological solution that does not require human
certification for food products.
The solution is based on the integration of space technologies (Galileo Open Service Navigation
Message Authentication) and blockchain with smart devices and mobile platforms. The
project will develop a trusted platform for use among various stakeholders for the automated
certification of activities without requiring third-party, human certification.
More information available at: https://www.space4green.eu
Current usage of EGNSS
Galileo High Accuracy Service (HAS) delivers
horizontal accuracy down to 20 cm and vertical
accuracy of 40 cm, which is crucial for precise
positioning and guidance in agricultural
practices such as planting seeds, applying
fertilisers and pesticides, and harvesting
crops. Farmers can leverage this accuracy
to minimise overlaps, reduce costs and
maximise productivity. This level of accuracy
is vital in agricultural applications that require
high precision, such as autonomous farming
equipment, variable rate application of inputs,
land surveying and mapping.
The Open Service Navigation Message
Authentication (OSNMA) provides a high
level of data trustworthiness and protection
against malicious signal spoofing. This
ensures that farmers can rely on the GNSS signals for accurate navigation and positioning,
enhancing safety and preventing disruptions in operations.
These Galileo-specific differentiators make the system suitable for various agricultural activities,
empowering farmers with accurate positioning, reliable signals and enhanced capabilities for
optimal decision-making and efficiency.
Greater
Availability
Greater
Continuity
Higher
Accuracy
More Robust
Positioning
Authentication
Open Service
features
Multi-
frequency
High Accuracy
Service
GalileoGalileo
EGNOS
Current usage of Copernicus
Copernicus Sentinels 1 and 2 have changed the
agricultural sector, providing world-class data in
a free and open manner for multiple agricultural
applications at an adequate resolution and
appropriate revisit time.
A host of innovative companies are making use of
Sentinel data to provide variable rate application, CAP
monitoring and carbon content assessment services.
Additional products from the Copernicus Land
Monitoring Service (CLMS) (e.g. land use/land cover
and various indices) as well as products from the
Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) (e.g.
temperature and precipitation) also contribute to
agricultural activities.
Sentinels
Sentinel-1 Sentinel-2
Copernicus Services
Climate Change
(C3S)
Land
(CLMS)
Horizon Europe,
a programme of the
European Union
Horizon Europe,
a programme of the
European Union
Terminology used on this page is explained in Annex 2 for both GNSS and EO performance parameters.
AGRICULTURE41EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
REFERENCE CHARTS
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Revenue from GNSS device sales and services by applicationRevenue from GNSS device sales and services by region
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
0
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Farm machinery guidance Automatic Steering
Variable rate application Asset monitoring
0
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by region
0
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by application
Farm machinery guidance Automatic Steering
Variable rate application Asset monitoring
Farm management systems service revenues Commercial Augmentation Services*
* Commercial Augmentation Services only include revenue from applications in Agriculture. Commercial Augmentation
Services from applications in Infrastructure, Energy and Raw Materials and Urban Development and Cultural Heritage
segments are captured in the chart for Urban Development and Cultural Heritage.
0
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Farm machinery guidance Automatic Steering
Variable rate application Asset monitoring
0
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by region
0
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by application
Farm machinery guidance Automatic Steering
Variable rate application Asset monitoring
Farm management systems service revenues Commercial Augmentation Services*
* Commercial Augmentation Services only include revenue from applications in Agriculture. Commercial Augmentation
Services from applications in Infrastructure, Energy and Raw Materials and Urban Development and Cultural Heritage
segments are captured in the chart for Urban Development and Cultural Heritage.
0
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Farm machinery guidance Automatic Steering
Variable rate application Asset monitoring
0
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by region
0
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by application
Farm machinery guidance Automatic Steering
Variable rate application Asset monitoring
Farm management systems service revenues Commercial Augmentation Services*
* Commercial Augmentation Services only include revenue from applications in Agriculture. Commercial Augmentation
Services from applications in Infrastructure, Energy and Raw Materials and Urban Development and Cultural Heritage
segments are captured in the chart for Urban Development and Cultural Heritage.
0
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Farm machinery guidance Automatic Steering
Variable rate application Asset monitoring
0
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by region
0
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by application
Farm machinery guidance Automatic Steering
Variable rate application Asset monitoring
Farm management systems service revenues Commercial Augmentation Services*
* Commercial Augmentation Services only include revenue from applications in Agriculture. Commercial Augmentation
Services from applications in Infrastructure, Energy and Raw Materials and Urban Development and Cultural Heritage
segments are captured in the chart for Urban Development and Cultural Heritage.
42AGRICULTURE
REFERENCE CHARTS
Revenue from EO data sales by application
Revenue from EO services sales by applicationRevenue from EO services sales by region
Revenue from EO data sales by region
32 2033
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
2 2033
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
toring
ontent assessment
toring
ontent assessment
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
€ (millions)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
€ (millions)
Vegetation monitoring Biomass monitoring Soil condition monitoring
Crop yield forecating Variable rate application Precision irrigation
CAP monitoring Field definition Carbon capture & content assessment
Environmental impact monitoring Pastureland management
Vegetation monitoring Biomass monitoring Soil condition monitoring
Crop yield forecating Variable rate application Precision irrigation
CAP monitoring Field definition Carbon capture & content assessment
Environmental impact monitoring Pastureland management
32 2033
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
2 2033
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
toring
ontent assessment
toring
ontent assessment
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
€ (millions)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
€ (millions)
Vegetation monitoring Biomass monitoring Soil condition monitoring
Crop yield forecating Variable rate application Precision irrigation
CAP monitoring Field definition Carbon capture & content assessment
Environmental impact monitoring Pastureland management
Vegetation monitoring Biomass monitoring Soil condition monitoring
Crop yield forecating Variable rate application Precision irrigation
CAP monitoring Field definition Carbon capture & content assessment
Environmental impact monitoring Pastureland management
AVIATION AND DRONES
AVIATION AND DRONES
Aviation is a mature user of GNSS technologies that have enabled continuous growth
in traffic and connectivity to all regions of the world. This continued growth has
increased dependency on GNSS and ensured a continuous revision and assessment
of the performance needed to support traditional and emerging users, such as drones
and urban air mobility. Now, GNSS is essential in the aviation domain, a leading and
indispensable asset, supporting all aspects of aviation; Performance Based Navigation,
flight planning, operations, airspace design, and service provision to airlines, pilots,
airports and air navigation service providers. The publication of EGNOS based procedures
is also mandatory for all instrument runways in Europe, and projects are ongoing to
build EGNOS-based instrument flight procedures for non-instrument runways.
ICAO coordinates new international developments in aviation, standardised through
industry groups such as EUROCAE/RTCA. The current focus on the new range of Dual
Frequency Multi Constellation (DFMC) receivers aims to further improve the resilience of
GNSS given its criticality to aviation.
Unmanned aviation has experienced significant growth in recent years and GNSS
is key for positioning and to enable integration with manned aviation; safe, efficient
and conflict-free operations rely on GNSS as the primary PNT source. Together with
position augmentation through SBAS, this benefits applications requiring high precision
positioning, i.e. autonomous flights or Beyond Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS) operations.
Earth Observation (EO) data is also used by both manned and unmanned aviation.
Services utilising EO data support the prediction of ash cloud dispersion and enable aircraft
operators, airports and Aeronautical Information Service providers to plan adjustments to
flight routes that minimise environmental impacts. Coupled with other data sources, such as
elevation models and population density, EO data also becomes intrinsic to the assessment
of ground risk for specific category operations (SORA) for unmanned operations.
Note: Topics mainly related to the aviation sub-segment are indicated with an orange
circle , while the drones sub-segment topics are indicated with a blue circle .
What you can read in this chapter
• Key trends: GNSS and EO supporting aerodrome accessibility, enabling new modes
of transportation and monitoring environmental impact of aviation.
• User perspective: The dependency on GNSS and integration with EO is increasing.
• Industry: Aviation and drones value chains.
• Recent developments: GNSS assurance and integrity critical for aviation growth &
Electronic Conspicuity as the key U-space enabler.
• Future market evolution: Unlocking the drones’ potential.
• European Systems: EGNSS and Copernicus current usage.
• European Projects: Research and Innovation Projects in Aviation and Drones segment.
• Reference charts: Yearly evolution of installed base of GNSS devices and revenues by
application and region.
43© iStockWeather Services
• Hazardous weather identificationCommunication
• ATM system timingSurveillance
• Electronic Conspicuity (certified)*
• Electronic Conspicuity (uncertified)*
• GADSS2
• Infrastructure timingOperations Management
• Aircraft maintenance and operations
optimisation
• Airport capacity and safety
• Drone operations planning*
• Monitoring terrain obstacles
• U-space services*Navigation
• Drone navigation (uncertified)*
• Performance Based Navigation (PBN)
• Performance Based Navigation (PBN)
for drones*
• VFR complement1Environmental Monitoring
• Aircraft emission measurement and
monitoring
• Particulate matter monitoring1 Visual Flight Rules
2 Global Aeronautical Distress & Safety System
Application descriptions can be found in Annex 3.Legend
GNSS application
EO application
Synergetic application
(combined use of EO and GNSS)
* Applies also (or exclusively) to drones
44AVIATION AND DRONES
KEY TRENDS
GNSS and EO supporting aerodrome accessibility, enabling new modes
of transportation and monitoring environmental impact of aviation
EASA Opinion No 03/2023: Domains of UAS and VCA operations
Key market trends
• GNSS Augmentation and DFMC Standardisation promises improved performance for airspace users globally
• GNSS and EO supporting airport accessibility, enabling new modes of transportation and monitoring environmental impact of aviation
• Innovative Air Mobility operations expected to begin from 2024
GNSS augmentation continuing to unlock benefits for aviation
The augmentation of GNSS signals has been implemented in several regions of the world to address the
integrity needs of aviation in critical phases of flight such as approach and landing.
Satellite-Based Augmentation Systems (SBAS) (such as EGNOS) enable several GNSS applications that
would not be possible to the same minima without augmentation. Examples include LPV approaches at
instrument runways, including CAT I precision approach, instrument flight procedures at non-instrument
runways, approach procedures to offshore platforms or helicopter medical emergency operations. These
are described further within the recent developments section of this chapter.
The simplicity of utilising SBAS to provide the integrity without any dependency on terrestrial infrastructure
means the benefits can be provided to small aerodromes or airfields improving safety and accessibility
while avoiding the costly installation and maintenance of ground infrastructure. Such use of SBAS is
worldwide and best practices and lessons learnt are shared between Europe, Australia, New Zealand and
the United States.
EO supporting aviation operations and mitigating aviation environmental
impact
GNSS and EO are two key enablers supporting aviation’s efforts to reduce its environmental impact.
Together, they ensure that the most efficient routes are flown safely, with due regard for reducing flight
time whilst maximising fuel efficiency by taking advantage of accurate track keeping, adjusting routes
to take advantage of meteorological conditions whilst also minimising noise disturbance to the general
population living close to aerodromes.
SATAVIA uses EO data to monitor contrail formation, which is estimated to cause up to 60% of all aviation’s
climate impact, accounting for 2% of the overall human-caused climate impact. This is a widely recognised
issue, with efforts being undertaken globally to identify solutions as to how this can be reduced. Within
Europe, EUROCONTROL and CANSO organised an event on the 7th of November 2023, to improve the
understanding about contrails, together with their impact on climate and to explore potential mitigation
measures to minimise their occurrence. Similarly, the FAA and NASA are active contributors to the debates
on contrail topics. The industry, meanwhile, is developing its ownsolutions and tools supported by EO data
to help airlines to avoid areas most likely to contribute to contrail formation.
EO also supports aerodrome planning through monitoring of hydrogeological hazards and subsidence at
aerodromes, long term meteorological observations and changes in land use proximate to aerodromes.
This data enables master planning for future development and site assessments for new airports and
ancillary infrastructure. Other examples include EO data used to monitor and forecast volcanic ash and
dust clouds which have potentially catastrophic consequences for civil aviation.
Innovative Air Mobility taking-off
In August 2023, EASA Opinion No. 03/2023 proposed updates to the EU drone regulatory framework
and introduced novel terminology for Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) and Vertical Take-Off and
Landing (VTOL) capable aircraft (VCA) operations under the umbrella of Innovative Aerial Services (IAS),
which includes both Aerial Operations and Innovative Air Mobility (IAM). The IAM is defined as “safe,
secure, and sustainable air mobility of passengers and cargo enabled by new-generation technologies
integrated into a multimodal transportation system”. The EASA Opinion No. 03/2023 scheme as shown
below outlines the new categorisation and taxonomy of the Innovative Aerial Services.
IAM concepts are globally entering a phase of real operational trials. The 2024 Olympic Games in Paris
plan to trial IAM transporting passengers between stations, airports and Olympic stadiums. While these
will most likely be with a pilot onboard (EASA Opinion No. 03/2023 does not provide details on the PBN
capabilities), companies like EHang in China and Wisk in the US are planning autonomous operations
to commence service within the next two to three years with EHang having achieved Type Certification
in October 2023.
The supporting infrastructure is being developed just as quickly with a number of vertiports scheduled
to enter service in 2024, including in Paris (four locations), Singapore, Orlando, Italy, Germany, Spain and
Sweden according to the AAM Infrastructure Index. The electrical requirements for vertiports are also
being addressed with a recent study by the FAA/NERL in the US estimating the demand per site will be
between 900 kW and 13.3 MW.
With social acceptance of IAM still being a concern, the industry is focusing on the certification and
standardisation of the technology and supporting systems (like DAA or UTM) throughout the work in
EUROCAE WG-105 UAS and WG-112 VTOL.
©EASA
Innovative Aerial Services
Aerial Operations
Regional International
Innovative Air Mobility
Urban Air Mobility
AVIATION AND DRONES45EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
USER PERSPECTIVE
Sources of key EO and GNSS user requirements
The key EO and GNSS user requirements for the different application groups within the aviation and drones segment are collected using a harmonised procedure at EU level.
Information is collected through extensive interactions with user groups, providers and experts in a continuous process culminating at the User Consultation Platform (UCP). All
relevant requirements are documented in detail and updated regularly within the Report on Aviation and Drones user needs and requirements. User requirements for EO services
and products – as well as their evolution – are now also collected through the UCP. The process covers the EO user needs and requirements of commercial users based on inputs
from industry experts and user groups, mirroring the existing process implemented for GNSS.
Moreover, the collection of specific requirements for Copernicus services and products is supported through an integrated process involves different channels: (i) dedicated
studies (e.g. "NEXTSPACE" project, "Copernicus for EC (C4EC)" study, Commission Staff Working Document on user needs); (ii) targeted consultations organised by the European
Commission or the entrusted entities with the relevant communities; and (iii) regular and structured exchanges among representatives of the Copernicus governance structure and
Member States through the Copernicus User Forum.
The dependency on GNSS and integration with EO is increasing
EO supporting navigation, safety and sustainability
As aviation benefited from GNSS, the integrity of geospatial data defining runways, taxiways and
obstacles have also become more critical. Requirements defining the quality of this data have been
documented for several years and utilising EO is a natural and cost-effective solution when needing
to assess the obstacles. Utilising EO data effectively supports planning and safety applications for
aerodromes such as procedure design, runway and route analysis for airlines, monitoring of terrain
obstacle or airport planning. One of the critical challenges with utilising EO data is its recency since all
aviation data adheres to a strict update cycle of 28 days. Within this period, changes that impact navigation
data or are operationally significant are communicated to all stakeholders. Within the UCP, the analysis of
user requirements showed a preference for EO services supporting critical identification of terrain and
obstacles, even with the challenge of having higher data resolution, and increased update frequency rates.
EO also helps monitoring and forecasting of volcanic ash, atmospheric pollutants and contrails. During
the UCP 2022, users discussed the update rates and data resolution needed to support the use cases
presented. The standards for meteorological data are established by ICAO and the new services that can
be enabled utilising EO have the potential to provide better precision supporting more environmentally
efficient operations but require further standardisation. EO data coupled with urban data can also be
utilised for land-use planning to monitor the population living around airports, exposure to noise levels,
third party risk exposure and impact on biodiversity.
Data-driven drone operations risk assessment
The current regulatory framework (EU) 947/2019 requires drone operators within the EASA specific
category to carry out a risk assessment but does not specify the methodology and data to be used. In
response to this, an international organisation, JARUS, developed a Specific Operations Risk Assessment
(SORA) methodology that is widely used in and out of Europe. However, operators have at times
struggled to provide detailed ground risk analysis due to missing population data, while regulators have
not always approved applications in a timely manner due to the lack of standardisation on data used.
This was explored at UCP 2022, noting the challenges and opportunities of EO data to support this
standardisation. Several approaches are being explored, including the use of richer geospatial inputs,
such as a building layer to identify if locations are sheltered or not. In parallel, EASA and JARUS have
introduced an updated version of SORA 2.5 (still under consultation), which facilitates the shift from a
qualitative to a quantitative assessment.
Several options to complement the quantitative assessments exist, including applications of AI, big
data or digital twin models or incorporating data derived from cellular networks. These pose additional
challenges, including being costly and raising questions on privacy.
The increased accuracy provided by EGNOS enables safer drone operations at minimal cost in densely
populated areas. The latest EGNOS receivers for UAS provide upper bounds of the position uncertainty,
which is expected to enable an integrity concept currently being tailored to drone operations. This
includes the work within EUROCAE WG-105 SG-6 SORA to develop guidelines for the use of multi-
GNSS solutions for medium risk drones.
Together, EO and GNSS data can also support the future U-space environment including U-space
services like remote ID or geo-awareness that rely on precise positioning. EO geospatial (population/
housing) data already supports flight planning and ground population risk assessments, and the
frequency of these updates will become more important as it is relied on to support strategic and tactical
flight planning, moving maps and terrain avoidance systems.
46AVIATION AND DRONES
INDUSTRY
DRONE OPERATORS
& AIRLINES / AIRCRAFT
OWNERS AND
OPERATORS
AIRCRAFT & DRONE
MANUFACTURERS
COMPONENT
& RECEIVER
MANUFACTURERS
UTM SERVICE PROVIDERS
& ATM DATA SERVICE
PROVIDERS &
AIR NAVIGATION SERVICE
PROVIDERS &
REGULATORS AND MAIN
ORGANISATIONS
AERODROMES
&
INFRASTRUCTURE
OPERATORS
• DJI BAIWANG
• GMV*
• HEXAGON*
• INFINEON*
• QASCOM*
• SEPTENTRIO*
• ST MICRO
• TRIMBLE NAVIGATION
• U-BLOX*
FIXED WING
• ATMOS*, AUTEL ROBOTICS, AVY*,
DJI, ETRA AIR*, WINGTRA, ZIPLINE;
MULTI-ROTOR
• AUTEL ROBOTICS, DJI, EHANG,
ETRA AIR*, FLYING BASKET*,
PARROT*, PRECISIONHAWK;
SINGLE ROTOR
• BABCOCK*, SCHIEBEL*;
VTOL FIXED WING
• MANNA*, QUANTUM SYSTEMS*,
RIGITECH, UKREPECSYSTEMS,
WING;
IAM
• AIRBUS*, ARCHER, CRISALION*,
EHANG, HYUNDAI, JOBY
AVIATION, LILIUM, VERTICAL
AEROSPACE, VOLOCOPTER*
• CYBERHAWK
• EHANG
• HEMAV*
• LILIUM*
• MANNA*
• NASA
• SKYFUTURES*
• SKYPORTS*
• VOLOCOPTER*
• WING
• ZIPLINE
• DRONE ALLIANCE EUROPE (DAE)*
• EUROCAE*
• EUROCONTROL*
• GLOBAL UTM ASSOCIATION
• HAPS ALLIANCE
• INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION
• ORGANISATION (ICAO)
• JOINT AUTHORITIES FOR
RULEMAKING ON UAS (JARUS)
• RADIO TECHNICAL COMMISSION
FOR AERONAUTICS (RTCA)
• USSPS (D-FLIGHT, DRONIQ,
SKEYDRONE)
• UTM (AIRMAP, ALTITUDE ANGEL,
UNIFLY)
• AIRBUS*
• BLUENEST*
• FERROVIAL*
• SKYPORTS*
• URBANV*
• URBAN-AIR PORT*
• BEIJING BDSTAR
NAVIGATION
• CHCNAV
• COBHAM*
• COLLINS AEROSPACE
• FINMECANICA*
• GARMIN
• HONEYWELL
• LEONARDO
• NORTHROP GRUMMAN
• NUVOTON
• RTX
• SABCA*
• SAFRAN*
• SBG SYSTEMS*
• TECHTEST*
• THALES AVIONICS*
• TRANSDIGM GROUP
• TRIG AVIONICS*
• UNITED TECHNOLOGIES
• AIRBUS*
• BEECHCRAFT
• BOEING
• BOMBARDIER
• COMAC
• DASSAULT*
• EMBRAER
• GULFSTREAM AEROSPACE
• PILATUS AIRCRAFT*
• PIAGGIO AEROSPACE*
• TEXTRON
• UNITED AIRCRAFT
CORPORATION
• VULCANAIR*
MAIN AIRLINES ALLIANCES
• ONEWORLD
• SKYTEAM
• STAR ALLIANCE
USER GROUP ASSOCIATIONS
• AIRLINES FOR EUROPE (A4E)
• EUROPE AIR SPORTS
• EUROPEAN BUSINESS AVIATION
ASSOCIATION (EBAA)
• EUROPEAN HELICOPTER
ASSOCIATION (EHA)
• EUROPEAN REGIONS AIRLINE
ASSOCIATION (ERA)
• INTERNATIONAL AIRCRAFT OWNERS
AND PILOTS ASSOCIATION (IAOPA)
• INTERNATIONAL AIR CARRIER
ASSOCIATION (IACA)
• INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORT
ASSOCIATION (IATA)
• CIVIL AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES
ORGANISATION (CANSO)
• EUROPEAN UNION AVIATION SAFETY
AGENCY (EASA)*
• EUROCAE*
• EUROCONTROL*
• INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION
ORGANISATION (ICAO)
• RADIO TECHNICAL COMMISSION FOR
AERONAUTICS (RTCA)
• AIRPORTS COUNCIL INTERNATIONAL (ACI)
• INTERNATIONAL AIRPORTS
• REGIONAL AIRPORTS ASSOCIATIONS
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in GNSS downstream activities.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the company, though the actual area of activity
might be wider.
Please refer to page 23 for a comprehensive description of the GNSS value chain and how to interpret them at segment level.
LEGEND
Drones
Manned Aviation
European2 GNSS industry in the global arena
European and North American organisations dominated the manufacturing of aviation GNSS
receivers in 2021 with North American receiver suppliers accounting for more than three quarters
of the market and European suppliers around a fifth of the market.
The picture is more mixed regarding drones, with market share depending on the sophistication of
the drone platform. Overall, Asia-Pacific companies retain the largest share.
Aviation and drones GNSS value chain 1
AVIATION AND DRONES47EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
INDUSTRY
END USERS
INFORMATION
PROVIDERS
EO PRODUCTS
AND SERVICES
PROVIDERS
PLATFORM
PROVIDERS
INFRASTRUCTURE
PROVIDERS
DATA
PROVIDERS
• AIRBUS*
• AIS TECH*
• BLACKSKY
• CAPELLA SPACE
• ICEYE*
• LEONARDO (E-GEOS)*
• MAXAR
• PLANET
• SCEYE
• SPIRE GLOBAL
• COPERNICUS SENTINELS*
• EOS-4 (ISRO)
• LANDSAT (USGS/NASA)
• NOAA AND GOES
(NOAA)
• RELEVANT IN-SITU
NETWORKS
• RELEVANT EUROPEAN
NATIONAL MISSIONS
• FEDERATED
INFRASTRUCTURE
(E.G. GAIA-X)*
• SENTINEL
COLLABORATIVE
GROUND SEGMENT*
• COPERNICUS
ATMOSPHERE
MONITORING SERVICE
(CAMS)*
• COPERNICUS CLIMATE
CHANGE SERVICE (C3S)*
• COPERNICUS EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT SERVICE
(CEMS)*
• COPERNICUS LAND
MONITORING SERVICE
(CLMS)*
• COPERNICUS MARINE
SERVICE (CMEMS)*
• COPERNICUS SECURITY
SERVICE (CSS)*
• AWS
• CLOUDFERRO*
• GOOGLE CLOUD
• GOOGLE EARTH
• IBM CLOUD
• MICROSOFT AZURE
• T-SYSTEMS*
• CLOUDEO*
• CREODIAS*
• EARTH-I*
• GEOSS (GLOBAL EARTH
• GOOGLE EARTH ENGINE
• OBSERVATION SYSTEM
OF SYSTEMS)
• SATELLITE EARTHSTAR
GEOGRAPHICS
• SENTINEL-HUB*
(SINERGISE)
• CODE-DE*
• COPERNICUS
DATASPACE
ECOSYSTEM*
• OPENEO*
• WEKEO*
• BOHANNAN HUSTON
• CREOTECH
INSTRUMENTS*
• DARES TECHNOLOGY*
• DRONE RADAR*
• E-GEOS*
• EISAT IMAGENS DE
SATELITE*
• LUFTHANSA SYSTEMS*
• RHEA SYSTEM*
• SATAVIA
• SATELLITE IMAGING
• SNC-LAVALIN
• UNISPHERE*
• VANTAGE*
• ASCENDXYZ
• BOHANNAN HUSTON
• DARES TECHNOLOGY*
• EISAT IMAGENS DE
SATELITE*
• FLYCOM HOLDINGS*
• LUFTHANSA SYSTEMS*
• METEOBLUE*
• SATELLITE IMAGING
• SKYMAP GLOBAL
• SNC-LAVALIN
• AIR NAVIGATION
SERVICE PROVIDERS
• AIRLINES-AIR
OPERATORS
• AIRPORT PLANNERS
• AIRPORTS
• CIVIL AVIATION
AUTHORITIES
• DRONE OPERATORS
• FLIGHT PLANNERS
• INSTRUMENT FLIGHT
PROCEDURE DESIGNERS
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in the EO downstream activities. Please note that enterprises listed
in the data providers step of the value chain often provide platforms as a service. For the sake of simplicity the data providers are not repeated
in other stages of the value chain in which they are active.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 13 or a comprehensive description of the EO value chain and how to interpret them at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the company, though the actual area of activity might be wider.
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
European2 EO industry in the global arena
The value of EO for Aviation and Drones is growing
with more than 70 companies globally now active
within the segment. Europe maintains the highest
market share of commercial offerings in the Aviation
and Drones sector with more than 75% in 2021. Top
European players in this segment include Leonardo
(E-GEOS) and RHEA System, both of which combine
to around a half of the global market share.
Aviation and Drones EO Value Chain 1
EARTH
OBSERVATION
48AVIATION AND DRONES
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
GNSS assurance and integrity critical for aviation growth
Standardising Galileo for aviation applications
DFMC GNSS standardisation efforts are continuing within international working groups including the work
on ARAIM standardisation. In June 2022, the EU/US Working Group C provided a ARAIM CONOPS to
support the validation of H-ARAIM Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPs). In January 2023, the
ICAO Navigation System Panel (NSP) validated the ARAIM SARPs, which were endorsed by the ICAO Air
Navigation Commission in October 2023 when it endorsed and formally proposed the standards for inclusion
in the next amendment of ICAO Annex 10: Aeronautical communication, Volume I (publication expected in
2025). The ICAO NSP has also developed the ARAIM CONOPS based on past work performed by the EU/US
Working Group C.
Galileo will support ARAIM applications by broadcasting a Galileo Integrity Support Message (ISM), which will
be added into the current INAV messages to provide all Galileo Integrity Support Data (ISD) needed by the
ARAIM algorithm.
In September 2023, the GPS/Galileo SBAS DFMC MOPS (ED-259A/DO-401) was published. EUROCAE
WG-62 intends to focus next on the updated ED-259B/DO-401A for Q1 2025. Although the final scope
is still to be agreed, this update is expected to be the first DFMC GNSS receiver standard defining the
requirements and test procedures for aviation equipment certified against a TSO and/or an ETSO. The ICAO
NSP is simultaneously working on a new DFMC GBAS concept and corresponding standards with the intent
to complete Baseline Development Standards by Q4 2024: a high-level concept agreed in ICAO and RTCA/
EUROCAE, a detailed concept paper, a draft of airborne and ground RTCA/EUROCAE MOPS and a baseline
development SARPs.
EGNOS becoming ubiquitous
Aircraft operators are progressively equipping with SBAS avionics in anticipation of Commission Implementing
Regulation (EU) 2018/1048, requiring LPV (localiser performance with vertical guidance) implementation
at all instrument runways from January 2024 and PBN as a standard means of navigation by 2030. ILS
(instrument landing system) will remain but only as a back-up infrastructure. As of November 2023, 935
EGNOS-based procedures are available at 497 airports and helipads (AIRAC Cycle 2312).
For example, Air France is already updating its fleet, acquiring new aircraft that are SBAS capable from the
factory, while waiting for a Supplemental Type Certificate (STC) or a Service Bulletin (SB) to upgrade their
existing fleet. Pilots do not require special operational approval to fly LPV procedures as it is included in their
standard instrument rating training.
Helicopter operations are also benefiting from EGNOS, especially for helicopter emergency medical services
(HEMS). PinS approaches and departures continue to be designed and implemented, along with Low-Level
Routes, allowing helicopters to increase their operations safely (see page European Projects for Aviation and
Drones).
EGNOS V3, the next generation of EGNOS, will provide signal augmentation for dual-frequency bands L1/
L5 (GPS constellation) and E1/E5 (Galileo constellation), protected for aviation use. As of June 2023, EGNOS
payload is ready to transmit the first EGNOS V3 test signals. With the new payload, the EGNOS Space
segment will be fully ready for EGNOS V3 delivering improved user experience and reaffirming the Union’s
investment in advanced space technologies. Together with the EGNOS GEO-5 and the deployment of the next
generation Galileo satellites, Europe further increases its autonomous access to space.
Map of
operational
EGNOS
procedures
ED-259B/DO-401A
ED-259A/DO-401A
ARAIM SARPs
AVIATION AND DRONES49EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Electronic Conspicuity as the key U-space enabler
Electronic Conspicuity (EC) enabling airspace integration
Electronic Conspicuity or E-conspicuity is key to increasing safety by reducing the likelihood of Mid-Air
Collisions (MAC), especially in Class G airspace. Increasing awareness of any aircraft operating in the
same airspace benefits both manned and unmanned aircraft that can transmit their position information.
This is recognised in the community and a variety of certified and uncertified EC technologies have
developed, but these are not always interoperable with each other. A lack of harmonised technical
standards addressing the interoperability of EC systems is a major impediment to their widespread use
in Europe and unlocking potential benefits to new entrants (e.g. drones, UAM, AAM).
Regulatory bodies are working on addressing the interoperability between airspace users
and requirements for Electronic Conspicuity of manned aircraft for U-space operations (SERA 6005
(c)) entered into force in 2023. Additionally, ED 2022/024/R introduces four means to be conspicuous,
one being ADS-L 4 SRD860. In January 2023, EASA published technical specification of ADS-L
transmissions using the SRD860 frequency band for aircraft to become electronically conspicuous to
U-space Service Providers (USSPs), intended to support manufacturers developing ADS-L compliant
EC devices/systems.
For EC device position information to be relied on, the PVT transmitted needs to be of sufficient
quality and integrity to support application service requirements. SBAS can deliver a cost-effective
solution to ADS-L transmissions since it improves the quality of GNSS information by correcting
signal measurement errors and providing information about the accuracy, integrity, continuity and
availability of its signals. The signal corrections are then broadcast over the covered area using
geostationary satellites providing an augmentation, or overlay, to the original GNSS signal. Integrating
SBAS capable receivers into ADS-L compliant systems would deliver a significant capability
improvement that could enhance position integrity. This has been implemented in the US where SBAS
already supports TABS (Traffic Awareness Beacon System).
U-space integration and new market entrants
UAS operations are in a phase of considerable growth presenting both opportunities and challenges to
the aviation community. Safe integration of these new airspace users into Europe’s busy skies depends
on interoperability between manned and unmanned aviation. With this objective, EASA published its
first set of Acceptable Means of Compliance (AMC) and Guidance Material (GM) in 2022 to support the
harmonised, safe and efficient implementation of U-space across the European Union.
The first regulatory framework for U-space (Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/664,
2021/665 and 2021/666) sets out much needed provisions for three new stakeholders in the aviation
industry entering this market – Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) operators, U-space Service Providers
(USSP) and Common Information Services Providers (CISP).
The U-space framework relies heavily on state-of-the-art technology with GNSS a cornerstone
supporting mandatory services such as network identification, UAS flight authorisation, geo-
awareness or traffic information. Precise positioning and navigation accuracy and integrity are
enabled through GNSS – especially for Beyond Visual Line Of Sight (BVLOS) operations. The UCP 2022
identified several priority focus areas to support the growth of services within U-space, namely: system
redundancy, authentication of GNSS signals and monitoring systems to confirm platform status, a
common altitude reference system. Therefore, EGNSS solutions are key to supporting U-space services
and flight planning by operators supported by EO for the ground risk assessment – for example with
population density information.
© FLYER
© iStock
50AVIATION AND DRONES
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
Unlocking the drones’ potential
Shipments of GNSS devices by application (Drones only)0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by application (Drones only)
Performance Based Navigation (PBN) for Drones Electronic Conspicuity (certified)
Electronic Conspicuity (uncertified) Drone navigation (uncertified)
4 000
7 000
10 000
13 000
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Electronic Conspicuity (certified) Electronic Conspicuity (uncertified)
VFR complement Drone navigation (uncertified)
Performance Based Navigation (PBN)
The Drone Strategy 2.0 creating a framework to enable growth
The Drone Strategy 2.0, launched in 2022, aims to set out a clear vision for the development of the drone
sector and of a thriving and viable drone eco-system in the European Union. Growth to date has been
more limited than previously predicted due to regulatory hurdles. Proposals within the Drone Strategy 2.0
establish a framework with a number of actions that, if implemented, are expected to enable this multi-
billion market and create an estimated 145 thousand jobs within the EU. These actions once completed
will provide the certainty needed for private investment to target those sectors seen as offering the highest
potential within the sector.
Today, drones are already used across areas such as transport and delivery, telecommunications and
weather and pollution monitoring, agriculture, construction, surveillance, film-making, healthcare, medical
emergency, energy, environment, and public safety and security. The implementation of all the actions
from the Drone Strategy will be an essential enabler for the uptake for drones in transport and delivery.
EGNOS and Galileo (including HAS and OSNMA) will play a key role in improving the performance and
integrity of GNSS essential for safety and liability critical applications underpinning the goals of the
Drone Strategy. However, to enable drone delivery applications in densely populated areas, additional
technical solutions will be needed to address multipath and degradation of the GNSS signal between
buildings and urban canyons. The release of the 3GPP Release 18 standard enables additional GNSS
assistance data, including localised signal blockage information, to be transmitted over a mobile network.
This along with other industry initiatives are addressing these challenges to improve the predictability of
GNSS performance in these environments.
Innovative Air Mobility: Initial operations of passenger transportation on
the horizon
Innovative Air Mobility (IAM) is expected to start operations in the next few years in China and USA
(Elroy Air, EHang, Archer or Autoflight), with autonomous concepts being pioneered in the market. The
restrictive regulatory environment in Europe is expected to result in commercial operations starting later.
The German manufacturer Volocopter currently has the highest ARI (AAM Reality Index) of 8.6/10 which
describes the likelihood of an OEM certifying their aircraft, entering service and producing it in thousand
of units per year*. Although their VoloCity and VoloRegion aircraft are designed to be autonomous, the
initial operations will be piloted. Vehicles of other European manufacturers such as Vertical Aerospace and
Pipistrel will also enter service in the following years.
One of the key elements in the IAM value chain is the physical infrastructure. New vertiports are being
built across Europe and the UK (e.g. Zaragoza, Coventry and Paris). The leading vertiport developers (e.g.
Skyports, UrbanV, Urban-Air Port, Bluenest or Ferrovial) are partnering with various vehicle manufacturers
to develop a technology-agnostic design allowing them to maximise market potential with operations
beginning in the next two to three years.
* https://aamrealityindex.com/aam-reality-index
Drone shipments have grown significantly over the past years, with the shipments of GNSS devices
supporting navigation now dominating sales within the aviation and drones sector. The majority of the
growth has been driven by uncertified solutions, which have been easier to introduce quickly within
the heavily regulated aviation and drones sector. Manned aviation has been growing at a much slower
rate in comparison, with negligible shipments; however, the contribution to overall revenues is higher
due to certification requirements (please see page 53).
In the coming years, further growth depends heavily on regulatory enablers which have not advanced
as quickly as the technology enablers. Therefore, the forecasts illustrated remain conservative.
As the regulatory environment for drones matures, the demand for services might lead to increased
shipments. An example is the case of the introduction of the U-space regulations in 2023 placing the
requirements for electronic conspicuity, enabling integration between manned and unmanned traffic.
As a result of the regulations, all drones operating under the EASA specific category must be equipped
with a remote identification device. In addition, whilst most operations are contained within SAIL I, II,
higher demand for operations under SAIL III, IV is expected.
AVIATION AND DRONES51EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
EUROPEAN SYSTEMS
EGNSS and Copernicus current usage
Current usage of EGNSS Current usage of Copernicus
EGNSS for drones
In January 2023, the Galileo High Accuracy Service (HAS) became operational and the latest
Performance Reports are now available. HAS provides free-of-charge high-accuracy Precise Point
Positioning (PPP) corrections up to decimetre level through the Galileo signal (E6-B) and by terrestrial
means (Internet). High-performance positioning systems for drones are being developed in the
framework of current European projects, within the U-space framework focusing on VLL (Very Low
Level) and UAS (Unmanned Aircraft System) operations.
To address any issues with spoofing and ensure the trustworthiness of information received from
Galileo satellites, Galileo has developed OSNMA, a freely accessible data authentication function
for Galileo Open Service users worldwide. This provides a level of security that protects against
spoofing and ensures that the positioning data is reliable and based on known source data. OSNMA,
in combination with other technologies, can pave the way to a new class of U-space services and
eVTOL operations enabled by EGNSS for legal protection and customer accreditation. OSNMA has
many potential applications, for instance: a) authenticated PVT of geotagged image/data collected from
a camera/sensor onboard the drone; b) authentication of the path for BVLOS operations, or c) last mile
authentication of position as proof of delivery.
Drone Authentication Guidelines
A Drone Authentication Guidelines document is currently under development. The main scope of the
document is to provide guidelines to the manufacturers for the correct implementation of OSNMA in
the GNSS receivers for drones’ applications, in the form of tests and recommendations.
Copernicus for drones
Various drone operators in Europe have successfully integrated GHSL data from Copernicus into their
drone software and used it together with Digital Elevation Model (DEM) for management and mission
planning. The EO data can also be used by the authorities reviewing and approving flight permits.
Up-to-date satellite imagery from the Copernicus Emergency Management Service is also used by
drone operators carrying out disaster recovery missions.
The weather data from the Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) is useful for strategic flight
planning while land use/cover from the Land Monitoring Service (CLMS) can support drone operators
in assessing the ground risk of their operations. In cooperation with a drone operator, FlyingBasket,
EUSPA has explored to what extent land use/cover data can
support the intrinsic Ground Risk Class (iGRC) determination
by looking at how CLMS (land use) can support operators and
regulators to understand the number of people exposed to a
drone flight. The key advantage of Copernicus datasets are the
widespread availability of detailed data, the open specification
documentation and the consistent resolution available at a
pan-European level, which enables trusted and harmonised
assessments across Europe.
Copernicus Digital Elevation Model (DEM) can be used for
mission planning. Having a terrain and obstacle database for low
altitude flights enables operators to visualise the flight mission
elevation profile and maintain safe separation from terrain.
EGNSS for manned aviation
EGNOS is used to improve the accuracy and reliability of
GNSS positioning in all phases of flight and enables LPV-
200 procedures at hundreds of European airports. The next
step in improving EGNOS is to make use of other signals
as well. Amendment 93 to Annex 10, Vol. I was adopted
by the ICAO Council and is applicable from November 2023
and supports the introduction of DFMC GNSS by adding
provisions for additional frequencies of operation for GPS,
GLONASS and SBAS. It also introduces provisions for the
new BeiDou Navigation Satellite System and Galileo system.
Galileo SAR for manned aviation
The Galileo SAR Return Link Service was declared operational on January 21, 2020, for the initial
services, i.e. Acknowledgement Type 1. A service enabled by the Galileo SAR RLS, the Beacon Command
Service for Remote Beacon Activation, has recently had manufacturer guidelines published based on the
document ED-277 "MASPS for Aircraft ELT Remote Command via Return Link Service". This service
allows remote beacon activation/de-activation, while also capable to trigger self-test on its own.
Copernicus for manned aviation
Copernicus provides observation data and forecasts of
atmosphere composition (e.g. trace gases, particulate matter).
Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service (CAMS)
supports manned aviation monitor and forecast volcanic ash
and dust clouds which have potential to generate long-term
damage (volcanic ash has immediate and even catastrophic
damage potential) to civil aviation. CAMS data is also available
in weather forecast applications. Pilots can use it in flight
planning tools to monitor nitrogen dioxide, fine particle matter,
aerosol optical depth and ozone layers.
AsSiSt – Aircraft Support & Maintenance Services, launched in
March 2019, is a project utilising atmospheric datasets obtained
via CAMS to help airlines and aircraft manufacturers optimise
their plans for Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul. The datasets
contain everything needed to compute three key indicators of
atmospheric conditions: abrasion, clogging and corrosion.
High accuracy
Service
Position
Reliability
More robust
positioning
Vertical
Accuracy
LPV 200
SAR retourn link
Authentication
features
Safety-of-Life
Service
GalileoGalileo
Dual-
frequency
EGNOS
Sentinels
Copernicus Services
Sentinel-1 Sentinel-3
Atmosphere
(CAMS)
Sentinels
Sentinel-1 Sentinel-2
Copernicus Services
Climate Change
(C3S)
Land
(CLMS) Emergency
(CEMS)
Sentinel-3
Terminology used on this page is explained in Annex 2 for both GNSS and EO performance parameters.
52AVIATION AND DRONES
EUROPEAN PROJECTS
Research and innovation projects in aviation and drones segment
Certified E-GNSS remote tracking of drone and aircraft flights
(CERTIFLIGHT)
The project explores new U-space services addressing legal certification of flight tracks (for both
manned and unmanned traffic), through the introduction of a disruptive EGNSS-IoT digital system.
The system features a software platform to generate certified reports of flight tracks and the flight logs
of drones and GA aircraft, especially for safety related and commercially valuable applications. The
service will support new U-space business services (e.g. activation of Smart Contracts when specific
conditions are met, such as flying specific routes for drone package delivery).
The recorded tracks may be useful to assess airspace infringements as well as for possible accident
or incident investigations. The system is based on a digital EGNSS/IoT device installed on the aircraft,
equipped with an OSNMA Galileo/EGNOS enabled receiver, capable to guarantee the authenticity of
their position information at the origin, without the possibility of counterfeiting or spoofing.
More information available at: https://certiflight.info/
Drones and Egnss for LOw aiRspacE urbAN mobility (DELOREAN)
The DELOREAN project (drones and EGNSS for low airspace urban mobility) explores urban air mobility
in the lower urban airspace. The main goal of the project is to develop navigation and positioning
requirements for UAM applications, and to demonstrate how EGNSS can contribute to UAM. As part
of this project, several drone test flights were carried out and EGNSS application specific requirements
for UAM and package delivery were explored. The Spanish city of Benidorm hosted the urban lab
where the testing was performed.
DELOREAN also aims to contribute to definition of EGNSS requirements and standards which could
feed into acceptable means of compliance (AMC) framework in the new European drone regulation,
especially for the EASA specific category (including specific operations risk assessment method -
SORA).
More information available at: https://www.euspa.europa.eu/drones-and-egnss-low-airspace-urban-
mobility
Demonstration Of Runway Enhanced Approaches Made with Satellite
Navigation (DREAMS)
The VLD1-W2-DREAMS project researched the reduction of noise impact around the airports using
GBAS/SBAS precision approaches via live trials in Frankfurt, Rome-Ciampino and Twente airports:
• Increased Second Glide Slope (ISGS) is an approach procedure consisting of approaches and
landings on a steeper glide slope than the common worldwide 3° but limited to no more than 4.49°.
• Second Runway Aiming Point (SRAP) is an approach procedure, consisting in approaches and
landings to a published second runway threshold and aiming point located further on a runway.
• Increased Glide Slope to Second Runway Aiming Point (IGS-to-SRAP) operation is considered as a
variant type of SRAP operation, combining an increased glideslope to the second runway aiming point.
Approaching with a higher glideslope and/or at a higher altitude than the usual one reduces the noise
footprint during the final approach. Theoretical research was also carried out on the Adaptive Increased
Glide Slope (A-IGS) precision approach which introduces a significant change compared to ISGS
operations as the final glide slope value is replaced with an optimised value calculated by the aircraft.
More information available at: https://www.sesarju.eu/projects/DREAMSVLD
MUlti-mode Global positioning system and Galileo (MUGG)
The MUGG project – MUlti-mode Global positioning system (GPS) and Galileo project – aims to
develop an aviation SBAS dual-frequency multi-constellation (DFMC) receiver. The MUGG project
actively supports future civil aviation GNSS receiver standardisation and certification. Support is
implemented through a prototype of the latest EUROCAE ED-259 – MOPS for Galileo/GPS/SBAS
airborne equipment – and in-flight demonstration of the enhanced capabilities.
GNSS evolution, with an increased number of satellites and new signals, available due to DFMC,
enables the GNSS navigation computation to have improved accuracy, integrity and availability. These
efficiencies increase the detection and mitigation capability of GNSS with regards to radio frequency,
ionospheric interference and multipath. As a result, GNSS improves navigation capabilities worldwide.
EUSPA and Collins Aerospace are collaborating to integrate and demonstrate the DFMC SBAS
functions into the GLU-2100 multi-mode receiver. The DFMC SBAS receiver development project
started in November 2019. It will be concluded with a flight test campaign on various commercial fixed-
wing and rotorcraft platforms. The GLU-2100 contributed to the validation of the ED-259A MOPS,
published in September 2023 within the joint EUROCAE WG-62/RTCA SC-159 working group.
More information available at: www.collinsaerospace.com
Horizon Europe,
a programme of the
European Union
AVIATION AND DRONES53EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
REFERENCE CHARTS
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Revenue from GNSS device sales by application5 000
15 000
10 000
25 000
20 000
35 000
30 000
45 000
40 000
50 000
Units (thousands)
0
500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
400
800
1 200
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Performance Based Navigation (PBN) Electronic Conspicuity (certified)
Electronic Conspicuity (uncertified) VFR complement
Drone navigation (uncertified)
20 000
30 000
40 000
50 000
0
100
200
€ (millions) 1 000
1 500
2 000
2 5005 000
15 000
10 000
25 000
20 000
35 000
30 000
45 000
40 000
50 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSSdevices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
400
800
1 200
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Performance Based Navigation (PBN) Electronic Conspicuity (certified)
Electronic Conspicuity (uncertified) VFR complement
Drone navigation (uncertified)
20 000
30 000
40 000
50 000
0
100
200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenues of GNSS device sales by application
Electronic Conspicuity (certified) Electronic Conspicuity (uncertified)
VFR complement Drone navigation (uncertified)
Performance Based Navigation (PBN)
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500Revenue from GNSS device sales by region
Installed base of GNSS devices by region5 000
15 000
10 000
25 000
20 000
35 000
30 000
45 000
40 000
50 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSSdevices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
100
200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenues of GNSS device sales by application
Electronic Conspicuity (certified) Electronic Conspicuity (uncertified)
VFR complement Drone navigation (uncertified)
Performance Based Navigation (PBN)
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 5005 000
15 000
10 000
25 000
20 000
35 000
30 000
45 000
40 000
50 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSSdevices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
400
800
1 200
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Performance Based Navigation (PBN) Electronic Conspicuity (certified)
Electronic Conspicuity (uncertified) VFR complement
Drone navigation (uncertified)
20 000
30 000
40 000
50 000
0
100
200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenues of GNSS device sales by application
Electronic Conspicuity (certified) Electronic Conspicuity (uncertified)
VFR complement Drone navigation (uncertified)
Performance Based Navigation (PBN)
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
NOTES
1. Certified Electronic Conspicuity devices relying on the aircraft’s integrated GNSS receiver are included within the PBN application.
2. GADSS Aircraft Tracking will either use the GNSS receiver quantified under Performance Based Navigation, or Electronic Conspicuity (certified).
3. The model does not include any Innovative Air Mobility (IAM) applications (e.g. drone package delivery or Urban Air Mobility).
54 © IStock
Application descriptions can be found in Annex 3.
CLIMATE, ENVIRONMENT,
AND BIODIVERSITY CLIMATE, ENVIRONMENT AND BIODIVERSITY
The urgent imperative to address environmental degradation and climate change is
increasing the need for environmental monitoring. In this context, Earth Observation
(EO) data has a long history of contributing to environmental resource management
including water, oceans, coasts, atmosphere and land. Such valuable data is also used
to assess the human impact on the environment and to conduct environmental audits,
which are independent evaluation processes usually led by public bodies; and to conduct
environmental impact assessments and ESG (environmental, social, and corporate
governance) reports usually directed by companies to assess their own impact on the
environment.
Traditional users of climate services include public bodies and environmental agencies.
However, non-governmental organisations, corporations, and the general public are also
increasingly showing interest. EO – and to a lesser extent GNSS data – is essential for
climate modelling, monitoring and forecasting, and for applications related to climate
change mitigation and adaptation. Specifically, EO enables the monitoring of the status
of snow, ice caps and the permafrost, sea-level rises and the quantity of greenhouse
gases in the atmosphere, along with many other direct consequences of climate change.
Growing concern about biodiversity is increasing the relevance of this topic. Although
data on parameters related to this subject is collected almost exclusively through on-site
observations, applications relying on EO data to monitor the ecosystems are also useful.
EO is particularly used to assess quantifiable parameters (e.g. related to soil health, water
quality and coral reefs health) in various ecosystems (water, coastal, terrestrial, snow and
ice) and to detect when an imbalance in these parameters can inflict damage to the local
flora and fauna. GNSS data, on the other hand, supports tracking of threatened animals.
Note: Topics mainly related to the environmental monitoring sub-segment are indicated with
an orange circle , the climate services sub-segment topics are indicated with a grey circle
and the biodiversity, ecosystems and natural capital sub-segment topics with blue circle .
What you can read in this chapter
• Key trends: Climate and biodiversity crisis is driving new policies and actions which in
turn are increasing demand for EO data.
• User perspective: Commercial users as well as NGOs use EO and GNSS-powered services.
• Industry: Climate, environment, and biodiversity EO value chain.
• Recent developments: Innovative projects and niche capabilities are progressing, while
new types of actors are becoming more available on the market.
• Future market evolution: The evolution of technology and integration of various data
sources with EO will greatly influence the market growth.
• EU systems & projects: Several key projects are developing climate, environment and
biodiversity indicators using Copernicus.
• Reference charts: Yearly evolution of EO revenues by application and region.Biodiversity, Ecosystems
and Natural Capital
• Animal tracking for biodiversity purposes
• Ecosystems monitoringEnvironmental monitoring
• Environmental auditing
• Environmental impact assessment
and ESG
• Environmental resources managementClimate services
• Climate change mitigation and
adaptation
• Climate monitoring and forecasting
• EO-based climate modelling
• GNSS-based climate modellingLegend
EO application
GNSS application
Synergetic application
(combined use of EO and GNSS)
CLIMATE, ENVIRONMENT, AND BIODIVERSITY55EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
KEY TRENDS
The escalating environmental urgency drives the emergence of new policies
and markets, pushing further the need for data
While reporting standards are being further defined, EO data powers
the emergence of integrated value chains
Verifying the impacts of activities on the environment requires rigorous data and analyses. In this context,
establishing standards and methods is crucial for consistency, comparability and quality assurance.
Various associations and initiatives are now providing guidance and standards to report such impacts
and several of them place EO as a central part of the process. This is the case of the European Financial
Reporting Advisory Group (EFRAG) which is currently working on upcoming guidance for companies
to report in the context of the European Sustainability Reporting Standards (ESRS). Another interesting
initiative, directly involving EO, is the recent EUSPA powered “EU Space for Green Transition” report,
which helps companies to monitor their sustainability targets.
These new standards and guidance, together with the rise in demand for data, the growing availability
of EO data and technology progresses, create an ideal environment for the emergence of new integrated
value chains. In this context, various startups have seized the opportunity to bring EO into the portfolios
of environmental information providers for applications such as impact assessments, risk assessments,
legal audits, damage evidence, law enforcement and environmental resources management. Further
down in the value chain, governments are using EO for compliance monitoring and assessing their own
environmental impact.
An emerging role for EO data in carbon removal markets
To reach the EU objective of climate neutrality by 2050, there is a strong need to reduce carbon emissions
but also improve carbon removals – activities and technologies that remove carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere. The carbon removal market is boosted by the upcoming Carbon Removal Certification (cited
earlier) and various financial incentives for activities, such as afforestation, reforestation, carbon farming
and direct air capture.
A primary obstacle faced by carbon removal markets is the ability to accurately measure and quantify
carbon removals. The availability of data supporting these measurements is essential for the
establishment and functionality of such markets. In this regard, EO plays a key role in the identification
of areas for afforestation/reforestation/restoration, in monitoring seasonal productivity and ongoing carbon
sequestration actions, and in estimating ground biomass.
Currently, EO data is being used on a modest but increasing number of specific carbon capture projects,
such as green urban spaces and planting trees on specific farmlands. We expect the number of projects
using EO to greatly increase soon, especially in the context of the Carbon Removal Certification.
Key market trends for environmental monitoring
• The urgent imperative to address environmental degradation and climate change leads to new important regulations and practices shaping the future of environmental monitoring
• EO data is increasingly being a key element to address environmental standards, which powers the emergence of integrated value chains
• EO data allows accurate monitoring of carbon sequestration efforts which will allow carbon removal markets to develop
© IStock
Key new and upcoming regulations drive the need for data and services
The global environmental crisis is certainly (one of) the most pressing challenges our society faces today as
we are all now facing the devastating consequences of a warming climate and environmental degradation.
Actions to combat this changing environment is high on political, social, environmental and economic
agendas worldwide.
The main EU recent development in this context is the European Green Deal, launched in 2019. It is a
comprehensive package of policies and initiatives aimed at making the EU climate-neutral by 2050. Under
the Green Deal, there are several new and upcoming regulations linked to environmental monitoring. Firstly,
the new rule on Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD) which complements the EU’s legacy
ESG reporting program - the Non-Financial Reporting Directive (NFRD) -, requires a large set of companies
to disclose information on the risks and opportunities arising from environmental issues and to report on
the impact of their activities on the environment beyond just carbon, including pollution, water, waste, and
biodiversity. Secondly the new regulation to fight deforestation, which recently entered into force (2023)
obliges companies to ensure products sold in the EU have not led to deforestation and forest degradation.
In the same vein, the EU Critical Raw Materials Act (2023) ensures secure and sustainable supply chains
for raw materials. Finally, there is the new legislation for Carbon Removal Certification on which the EU
is currently working. It aims to develop the necessary rules to monitor, report and verify the authenticity
of these removals. At global level, the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are also
increasingly addressing environmental challenges.
In this policy context, understanding our impact on the environment and obtaining unequivocal evidence
of the changes taking place are key, with EO being one the major tools used for the monitoring of various
environments including water, oceans, coasts, atmosphere and land.
56CLIMATE, ENVIRONMENT, AND BIODIVERSITY
KEY TRENDS
Improved models and services are being developed to address climate
change efficiently
Key market trends for climate services
• Recent climate-related policies and investments increase the quantity of projects related to climate mitigation and adaptation
• The topic of climate resilience is rapidly gaining prominence as a major focus area
• The use of EO is essential to improve climate models and projections
Numerous climate-related policies, initiatives and decisions at EU and
global level are driving the need for data
In recent years, a significant shift in countries’ approach to climate change has occurred due to investment
trends and forward-thinking decisions. At the global level, important international cooperations and projects,
such as the Paris Agreement, the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the SDGs, are increasingly
pushing decision-makers to address climate change. More recently, the United States' return to the Paris
Agreement (2021) is also an important event worth noting in favour of climate change mitigation worldwide.
Another notable development on the global stage has been the integration of recommendations on climate-
related risks into the regulatory frameworks of several jurisdictions. According to a Deloitte study
(2023), countries such as Singapore, Canada, Japan and South Africa, have taken proactive steps recently to
ensure that businesses and industries operating within their borders account for environmental risks in their
strategies and operations, with many more countries soon to follow.
At EU level, the momentum for change involves pioneering decisions. A recent significant milestone is the
allocation of one third of the massive €1.8 trillion of investments budgeted in the NextGenerationEU Recovery
Plan to fund the European Green Deal. This colossal investment, pushing green innovation as a priority,
shows the EU's commitment to be a global leader in environmental stewardship and economic recovery.
Also embedded within the green deal, the EU's climate strategy encompasses policies and measures to
significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions, accelerate the transition to renewable energy sources and
foster green innovation across various sectors.
In tandem, the EU Climate Adaptation Strategy, also a pivotal component of the Green Deal, underwent a
crucial update in 2021. This strategy is designed to enhance the EU's resilience to the inevitable impacts of
climate change, ensuring that communities, infrastructure and ecosystems are better prepared to withstand
and recover from climate-related challenges, such as extreme weather events and rising sea levels.
Climate resilience is not just a keyword but a common goal driving
the transformation of value chains
Climate resilience is about preparing for the inevitable consequences of climate change. This includes
fortifying infrastructure, enhancing natural ecosystems, improving disaster preparedness, and fostering
social and economic systems that can endure and bounce back from the challenges posed by a warming
planet.
EO specific applications in climate resilience are various. For example, EO data helps monitor the health of
ecosystems and natural resources, such as forests, wetlands, and oceans affected by climate change or
to provide timely warnings and accurate forecasts on extreme weather events that enable communities
to prepare and respond effectively, reducing the impact of these events. EO data also helps manage
water resources by monitoring precipitation, snow cover, and river levels affected by climate change. This
information supports efficient water allocation, drought mitigation and flood control measures.
With the recent and upcoming regulations pushing businesses and industries from various countries
to account for environmental risks in their strategies and operations or to disclose such information, a
whole value chain is emerging with regards to climate risks. Information providers make use of EO data
to pioneer innovative services while standardisation bodies, such as the Task Force on Climate-related
Financial Disclosures (TCFD), are gaining international recognition, facilitating the integration of climate
resilience metrics into financial and business frameworks.
EO helps to improve climate models
Climate models provide crucial information for policymakers, government agencies, and international
organisations in formulating climate policies and strategies. They take into account various factors, such
as atmospheric conditions, ocean currents and greenhouse gas emissions, to understand interactions
between the different components and make projection.
Climate modelling is in a state of continuous evolution as researchers refine existing models and create
new ones, incorporating the latest scientific discoveries, data and computing capabilities. In this context,
EO is a central tool in improving climate models. According to the OECD (2017), satellite data provides
significant contributions to more than half of the 50 essential climate variables that are currently in use. A
perfect illustration of such contribution is the EU Destination Earth project which combines EO data and
AI-based climate modelling to develop a comprehensive digital model of the planet, enabling a deeper
understanding of climate change impacts and informing effective mitigation strategies.
© IStock
CLIMATE, ENVIRONMENT, AND BIODIVERSITY57EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
The urgent need to protect biodiversity is triggering the use of EO
Key market trends for biodiversity, ecosystems and natural capital
• The recent growing concern about biodiversity brings this topic to the centre of many new policies, funds and events
• A new market focused on supplying data to facilitate nature/ecosystems monitoring is emerging
• Ecosystem conservation and restoration projects are increasingly relying on EO
KEY TRENDS
A new market centred around the provision of data in support of nature/
ecosystem monitoring is emerging
In the evolving landscape of biodiversity conservation, we observe the rise of an emerging market
centred around the provision of data. This trend extends to the financial sector, which is increasingly
engaging with biodiversity-related initiatives and driving the development of new service providers and
standardisation bodies, such as the Taskforce on Nature-related Financial Disclosures (TNFD). Recognising
the potential in this sector, investors are also pouring significant capital into these emerging data markets,
allowing them to flourish.
Although the role of EO in this market is not as evident and key as it is for climate services (see previous
page), EO applications are developing in this field. In this context, startups, established corporations,
and major non-governmental organisations (NGOs) are gradually incorporating EO data into their
operational workflows to enhance their understanding of biodiversity, ecosystems and natural capital.
Ecosystem conservation and restoration projects are increasingly relying on
EO data
Ecosystems conservation and restoration efforts are underway on a vast scale worldwide, and the
increasing significance of EO data in these initiatives is becoming more apparent.
This includes coral reef ecosystem monitoring for which EO data offers information about global ocean
acidification, 3D models of the entire Great Barrier Reef and detection of change for coral reef health.
For example, Sentinel-2 has been used for a number of years to monitor the bleaching of Australia’s
Great Barrier Reef. Other rich ecosystems are wetlands for which EO data offers precious information
about their classification, habitat or biodiversity, biomass estimation, plant leaf chemistry, water quality,
mangrove forest and sea level rise. A third type of ecosystem is grassland for which EO offers data on
changes in biomass, overgrazing, grass maturity and density, informing for example grazing strategies.
An illustration of the role of EO is its integration into policies such as the monitoring of Natura 2000 sites
– covering over 18% of terrestrial and 8% of marine EU territory. This initiative has seen the development
of specialised Copernicus products like the Copernicus Land Monitoring Service (CLMS) Natura 2000
Land Cover product. Another recent highlight of the CLMS is the High-Resolution Vegetation Phenology
and Productivity (HR-VPP) service released in 2021, which improved the monitoring of vegetation
dynamics and allowed climatic and anthropogenic impacts on ecosystems to be assessed. Furthermore,
the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), a global organisation comprising government
and civil society organisations, has created a global typology for Earth’s Ecosystems, acknowledging the
critical role of remote sensing within it.
© IStock
Protection and monitoring of biodiversity is becoming a major driver for EU
and global policies, funds and events
Biodiversity is increasingly becoming the number-one priority in the development of new policies and
initiatives, both within the EU and on a global scale.
At the global level, key milestones like UN Biodiversity Conference (COP 15) in 2022 underline the
international community's dedication to safeguarding the Earth's biodiversity. Additionally, a significant
step was taken in August 2023 when the Global Biodiversity Framework Fund (GBFF) was launched in
Vancouver. This innovative fund aims to mobilise investments for the conservation and sustainability of
wild species and ecosystems. With representatives from 185 countries in the agreement, the GBFF is
set to attract funding from governments, philanthropic organisations, and the private sector.
Within the EU, the Green Deal encompasses the recent EU 2030 Biodiversity Strategy, which lays out
comprehensive goals to halt biodiversity loss and restore Europe's natural environments by the end of
the decade. Furthermore, the EU's dedication to biodiversity protection is marked with initiatives like
Natura 2000 sites, which aim to safeguard critical habitats, while the pioneering proposals to restore
Europe's nature by 2050 and halve pesticide use by 2030 underscores the EU's long-term commitment
to this cause. Initiatives, previously mentioned, such as the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive
(CSRD), also place a particular focus on biodiversity within the corporate sphere, encouraging responsible
practices.
58CLIMATE, ENVIRONMENT, AND BIODIVERSITY
USER PERSPECTIVE
Users across the entire Climate, Environment, and Biodiversity
value chain use EO and GNSS-powered services
Companies and institutions monitor their impact on the environment
Companies and institutions are under rising pressure from stakeholders, including customers, investors and
regulatory bodies, to take proactive steps towards environmental responsibility. While companies and other
institutions are increasingly required to monitor their environmental impact, they face challenges in finding the
right data and metrics. This drives the emerging market of data/service providers to innovate and progressively
integrate EO in its offer to help companies monitor their impact on the environment.
There are many instances of how companies can monitor their impact on the environment with EO data; they
can monitor land degradation by estimating vegetation cover loss, vegetation health, erosion patterns, and
changes in soil properties. Specifically, soil degradation can be monitored through EO by mapping different soil
physiochemical properties such as soil organic carbon, salinity and nitrogen. Companies can also monitor pollution/
degradation of the marine ecosystem by, for example, monitoring water turbidity (e.g. when performing harbour
extension or dredging activities) or monitoring the development of algal bloom (which can be a sign of polluted
waters) measured by the level of chlorophyll, a green pigment found in algae and plants.
Sources of key EO and GNSS user requirements
The key EO and GNSS user requirements for the different application groups
within the climate, environment and biodiversity segment are collected using a
harmonised procedure at EU level.
Information is collected through extensive interactions with user groups, providers
and experts in a continuous process culminating at the User Consultation
Platforms (UCP). All relevant requirements are documented in detail and updated
regularly within the Report on Climate, Environment and Biodiversity user needs
and requirements (starting with the 2023 UCP session on Environment). User
requirements for Earth Observation (EO) services and products – as well as their
evolution – are now also collected through the UCP. The process covers the EO user
needs and requirements of commercial users based on inputs from industry experts
and user groups, mirroring the existing process implemented for GNSS.
Moreover, the collection of specific requirements for Copernicus services and
products is supported by an integrated process that involves different channels: (i)
dedicated studies (e.g. "NEXTSPACE" project, "Copernicus for EC (C4EC)" study,
Commission Staff Working Document on user needs); (ii) targeted consultations
organised by the European Commission or the entrusted entities with the relevant
communities; and (iii) regular and structured exchanges among representatives of
the Copernicus governance structure and Member States through the Copernicus
User Forum.
Environmental centres use EO to monitor various ecosystems
Environmental centres, such as Conservation International and Eurac Research, need to tailor their missions
to align with the unique characteristics of their region and the specific issues they are addressing. To support
their undertakings, the availability and quality of EO services for monitoring ecosystems are improving. Some
environmental centres even develop their own services to adapt to the specificities of their regions. Upcoming
services, such as the ones triggered by the Cassini Maritime Prize led by EUSPA, will also be useful for environmental
centres to monitor and remove plastic in oceans and waterways.
In coastal areas, environmental centres can use EO for coral reef monitoring, coastal erosion or coastal habitats
monitoring. Applications are also applicable for terrestrial areas, such as land cover and vegetation monitoring.
Finally, snow and ice ecosystems are intensively monitored by environmental centres, especially since they are
strongly impacted by climate change.
Ecologists use GNSS for animal tracking
Ecologists need to track animals for conservation and scientific research as it provides data on animal behaviour,
migration, and habitat use, contributing to biodiversity preservation and ecosystem health.
In this mission, ecologists use specialised collars, tags or implants equipped with GNSS receivers. It has
revolutionised animal tracking, enabling researchers to study wildlife behaviour on a fine scale and gain a deeper
understanding of their needs. The data obtained from GNSS on animal tracking helps ecologists, together with
policymakers, to make informed decisions for wildlife conservation and management. It also helps identify critical
habitats, migration corridors and areas where animals may be at risk due to human activities or environmental
changes.
Sharing such data also significantly helps ecologists in their research or decisions. An example of project in this
regard is Movebank, a free platform on which thousands of researchers manage and share data. The platform
hosts more than 7 500 animal tracking studies, many of which have made their data available for anyone to view
and download.
CLIMATE, ENVIRONMENT, AND BIODIVERSITY59EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
INDUSTRY
Climate, Environment, and Biodiversity EO Value Chain1
EARTH
OBSERVATION
INFRASTRUCTURE
PROVIDERS
EO PRODUCTS
AND SERVICES
PROVIDERS
END USERS
PLATFORM
PROVIDERS
INFORMATION
PROVIDERS
DATA PROVIDERS
• CLOUDEO*
• CREODIAS*
• EARTH-I
• EDS CEODE
• EURODATACUBE*
• GOOGLE EARTH
ENGINE
• NORTH.IO*
• OPEN DATA CUBE
• PLANET EXPLORER
• SENTINEL-HUB*
(SINERGISE)
• UP42*
• 4 EARTH
INTELLIGENCE*
• BERRING DATA
COLLECTIVE*
• CLIMATESCALE*
• CONSTELLR*
• CYBELE*
• ECOMETRICA*
• E-GEOS*
• EOLAB*
• EOMAP*
• GEOVILLE*
• LOBELIA*
• MEEO*
• OHB*
• OVERSTORY*
• PLANETEK*
• SATELLIGENCE*
• STRATOLLOON*
• WATER INSIGHT*
• AIRQAST*
• CLIMATE ANALYTICS
• DELTARES*
• DYNAMHEX
• EARTHSENSE*
• FORA FOREST
INTELLIGENCE*
• JUPITER
INTELLIGENCE
• KAYRROS*
• PACHAMA
• SINGLE.EARTH*
• WORLD FROM
SPACE*
• CORPORATES
• DUTY HOLDERS
• ENVIRONMENTAL
AGENCIES
• ESG AUDITING AND
CERTIFICATION
PROVIDERS
• FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS
• GENERAL PUBLIC
• INSURANCE
PROVIDERS
• INTERNATIONAL
AGENCIES (E.G. UN)
• JUDICIARY
• LEGAL PRACTITIONERS
• NGOS
• POLICY MAKERS
• CLIMATE ADAPT*
• COASTAL TEP*
• CODE-DE*
• COPERNICUS
DATASPACE
ECOSYSTEM*
• FORESTRY TEP*
• WEKEO*
• CLIMATE TRACE
• COPERNICUS
ATMOSPHERE
MONITORING SERVICE
(CAMS)*
• COPERNICUS CLIMATE
CHANGE SERVICE
(C3S)*
• COPERNICUS MARINE
SERVICE (CMEMS)*
• COPERNICUS LAND
MONITORING SERVICE
(CLMS)*
• GLOBAL FOREST
WATCH
• AWS
• CLOUDFERRO*
• GOOGLE CLOUD
PLATFORM
• IBM CLOUD
• MICROSOFT AZURE
• SERCO
• T-SYSTEMS*
• FEDERATED
INFRASTRUCTURE
(E.G. GAIA-X)*
• SENTINEL
COLLABORATIVE
GROUND SEGMENT*
• AIRBUS*
• BLACKSKY
• CAPELLA SPACE
• E-GEOS*
• EARTH-I*
• GEOSAT*
• GHGSAT
• ICEYE*
• MAXAR
• NEC
• PLANET
• SATELLOGIC*
• UMBRA
• COPERNICUS
SENTINELS*
• LANDSAT (USGS)
• METEOSAT
(EUMETSAT)*
• RADARSAT (CSA)
• RELEVANT IN-SITU
NETWORKS
• RELEVANT EUROPEAN
NATIONAL MISSIONS*
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in EO downstream activities. Please note that enterprises listed
in the data providers step of the value chain often provide platforms as a service. For the sake of simplicity the data providers are not repeated
in other stages of the value chain in which they are active.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 13 for a comprehensive description of the EO value chain and how to interpret them at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the company, though the actual area of activity might be wider.
European2 EO industry in the
global arena
In 2021, there were more than 100 active
European EO companies in the climate,
environment and biodiversity segment.
Europe had a share of nearly half of the global
market. Top European companies in this
segment include Airbus, Leonardo (e-GEOS),
and Serco.
60CLIMATE, ENVIRONMENT, AND BIODIVERSITY
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Environmental resources management Environmental impact assessment and ESG
Environmental auditing Ecosystems monitoring
Climate change mitigation and adaptation EO-based climate modelling
Climate monitoring and forecasting
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application 2022
Environmental ressources management
Environmental impact assessments and ESG
Environmental auditing
Ecosystem monitoring
Climate change mitigation and adaptation
EO-based climate modelling
Climate monitoring and forecasting
15%
6%
57%
8%
8%
6%
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region 2022
EU27
Non-EU27 Europe
North America
Asia-Pacific
Middle East + Africa
South America + Caribbean
8%
10%
10%
25%11%
16%
20%
€700 million€700 million
EO is a key tool for major international organizations
NGOs are increasingly integrating EO
Biodiversity and environmental NGOs are starting to recognise the advantages of integrating EO into
their fundamental operations. This shift towards EO technology has been instrumental in enhancing the
effectiveness of conservation efforts worldwide. An exemplary illustration of this transformation is the
GLOBIL initiative, an online ArcGIS toolkit developed by the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF). This
innovative toolkit serves as a valuable resource for supporting ecosystem conservation initiatives across
the globe. It consolidates geospatial data and readily available resources, empowering both WWF staff
and partner organisations to make informed decisions and take targeted actions to safeguard our planet's
biodiversity. In addition to these large organisations, smaller NGOs are also increasingly using EO data
to validate and monitor the successful implementation of their biodiversity-focused projects, further
illustrating the growing importance of EO for biodiversity, ecosystems and natural capital conservation.
JRC latest development from a market point of view
The establishment of the Knowledge Centre on Earth Observation in 2021 by the EU Joint research
Centre (JRC) marks a significant development with substantial market implications. This initiative aims
to provide essential support for effectively realising the European Commission's key political priorities,
notably the European Green Deal and the Digital Agenda. The JRC's dedicated efforts have far-reaching
consequences for various market sectors, with a particular focus on applications related to wetlands,
biodiversity investments, agricultural landscapes and marine protected areas.
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application 2022
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Climate, Environment, and Biodiversity EO data and services sales amounted to around €700 million in
2022. Recent (extreme weather) events around the world are driving the demand for climate (physical
risk) monitoring and forecasting for a large variety of customers and assets. Specialised risk analyses
are in high demand by asset managers, to build resilience against climate change. As many climate
models incorporate EO data and services, this demand is considered a strong growth driver in the
segment, and explains how climate services account for approximately half of the forecasted revenue
share in this segment.
Biodiversity and environment applications each account for a quarter of the sales revenues. A major
growth driver for these applications are new environmental regulations, such as legally binding EU
nature restoration targets that are subject to impact assessments, many of which can benefit from EO
data and services. Furthermore, increased demand for such services is foreseen in the commercial sector
due to share- and stakeholders demanding comprehensive environmental impact mitigation efforts.
EO supports latest UN climate report
The latest UN climate report released in 2023 emphasises the urgent need for climate action to secure
a sustainable future, highlighting multiple feasible options to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and
adapt to climate change. EO is inherent to this report, serving as an integral component of the evidence-
based evaluation of climate change effects on terrestrial, aquatic, coastal, atmospheric, mountainous
and polar environments. This is especially crucial in regions where direct on-site measurements are not
feasible. The largest contribution is done particularly through ESA Climate Change Initiative (CCI), a
long-term satellite observation datasets.
According to the European Space Agency (2023), this report features a more substantial contribution
of EO data than previous iterations, while such data serves as irrefutable physical evidence of the shifts
occurring in our planet's climate system. From the alarming rise in sea levels to the surge in greenhouse-
gas emissions and the melting of sea ice, EO data stands as a crucial pillar in validating these critical
findings, emphasising the urgency of collective global action to combat climate change.
CLIMATE, ENVIRONMENT, AND BIODIVERSITY61EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
The increasing role of EO in environmental compliance assurance
Environmental compliance assurance refers to a range of measures and regulations put in place to
protect the environment. It includes rules, permits, monitoring and enforcement actions designed to
ensure that individuals, businesses and organisations comply with environmental laws and regulations.
The goal is to prevent and mitigate environmental harm, such as pollution, habitat destruction and
overexploitation of natural resources.
The role of EO spans the entire policy cycle, beginning with the preparation and design of new
environmental policies for which EO data provides insights into the current environmental landscape and
relevant technical parameters. During the implementation phase, EO data continues to be indispensable,
facilitating monitoring and compliance checks, thereby ensuring that environmental regulations are
adhered to effectively. Finally, in the evaluation phase, such data enables comprehensive before-and-
after comparisons of environmental conditions, offering concrete evidence of significant changes.
As illustrative examples, Sentinel data is being used in some regions to monitor illegal use of ground
water thanks to the monitoring of land subsidence due to aquifer exploitation with Sentinel-1 (SAR
Interferometry) together with the monitoring of greenness of crop and vegetation in dry regions with
Sentinel-2 (high-resolution optical images) and also Sentinel-1 which reveals information about the
plant’s structure and how much water is in the plant. Additionally, according to a study from EARSC on
Water Quality in Finland (2022), Sentinel data had been used to assess turbidity levels resulting from
local dredging activities that were harming biodiversity.
EO in support of a resilient society
EO data plays an essential role in climate change adaptation, particularly in assessing risks associated
with water scarcity, sea-level rise, flooding, irregular water streams, deforestation and extreme
heat, offering a comprehensive understanding of changing climate conditions. Such data allows precise
information on factors like changing precipitation patterns, forest cover, temperature anomalies, and
water body conditions to be collected. It then supports informed decision-making in developing
strategies and policies to mitigate climate-related risks, enhance resilience, and plan for sustainable
resource management and infrastructure development.
In September 2023, a workshop on Copernicus and Climate Adaptation reviewed challenges and
opportunities for climate adaptation across Copernicus, Earth Observation and the policy landscape. It
highlighted the recent developments such as improvements in seasonal and short-term predictions
allowing, for example, risks linked to urban hazards to be better assessed and improving adaptation
strategies. Its applications range from better winter street maintenance to reducing exposure of
vulnerable populations to heat waves.
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Environmental resources management Environmental impact assessment and ESG
Environmental auditing Ecosystems monitoring
Climate change mitigation and adaptation EO-based climate modelling
Climate monitoring and forecasting
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application 2022
Environmental ressources management
Environmental impact assessments and ESG
Environmental auditing
Ecosystem monitoring
Climate change mitigation and adaptation
EO-based climate modelling
Climate monitoring and forecasting
15%
6%
57%
8%
8%
6%
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region 2022
EU27
Non-EU27 Europe
North America
Asia-Pacific
Middle East + Africa
South America + Caribbean
8%
10%
10%
25%11%
16%
20%
€700 million€700 million
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
The breakdown in terms of region shows that North America has the greatest share of the market
(around 60%) in terms of EO data and services sales in 2022. This may be explained due to a history of
frequent extreme weather events in this region, such as hurricanes and floodings, as well as the capacity
of its technological private sector to address the needs of customers in this specific segment.
The remaining revenues are split evenly between Europe and the rest of the world, each accounting
for approximately one-fifth, or around €150 million, in sales. When comparing these numbers to
North America, it shows clear potential for growth in these geographical areas, driven by existing and
upcoming climate and environmental monitoring regulations as well as commercial demand.
The central role of EO for climate change adaptation and for environmental
compliance assurance Revenue from EO data & services sales by application 2022
62CLIMATE, ENVIRONMENT, AND BIODIVERSITY
Increasing utilisation of EO data as evidence in legal and court proceedings
EO data serve as persuasive evidence in several environment-related legal cases. For instance, EO
data can offer high-resolution satellite imagery illustrating changes in land use and deforestation,
aiding in cases involving illegal land clearing or environmental violations. Moreover, EO data can capture
indicators of climate change impacts, such as rising sea levels or altered vegetation cover, helping
establish causal links between human activities and environmental consequences. It can also detect
and monitor pollution sources, supporting lawsuits against polluters and quantifying environmental
damage. EO data help the assessment of biodiversity changes, habitat loss and the presence of
endangered species, underlining ecological value and challenging threats to protected areas. Finally, EO
data provide insights into urban planning, aiding assessments of construction project compliance with
environmental regulations.
While the use of EO data in legal proceedings is currently limited to isolated instances, we anticipate
a ripple effect as its usage in court becomes more widespread. This is particularly promising knowing
that such images facilitate common understanding, making it easier for everyone involved in the court
decision to understand the situation as it provides a clear and common basis for discussion and analysis.
An increasing number of organisations will adopt EO data for
environmental monitoring
The increase in environmental reporting is partly driven by the new EU Corporate Sustainability
Reporting Directive (CSRD) – which requires a large set of companies to disclose information on the
risks and opportunities arising from environmental issues, and on the impact of their activities on the
environment beyond just carbon, including pollution, water, waste and biodiversity. Such an increase
in environmental reporting is also influenced by the growing pressure from customer and investor
expectations, the need for effective risk management, brand reputation considerations, talent attraction,
employee retention and alignment with core values.
However, accurately assessing and mitigating companies’ environmental impacts is not an easy task.
In this context, various large companies are starting to rely on EO data to fulfil their environmental
commitments, while it enables consistent and comparative analyses at a continental scale. For
example, it can provide information on land cover to show the absence of deforestation or reforestation
efforts, which is useful to certify deforestation-free production of commodities (e.g. palm oil and cocoa)
in line with the recent regulation that obliges companies to ensure products sold in the EU have not
led to deforestation and forest degradation. EO is also useful for providing data on atmospheric gas
emission and evidence on the absence of pollution, such as oil spills in drilling sites.
2 2033
sment and ESG
0
200
400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
2032 2033
cation
ment and ESG
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
ion 2022
ental ressources management
ental impact assessments and ESG
ental auditing
m monitoring
change mitigation and adaptation
d climate modelling
15%
6%8%
8%
6%
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region 2022
EU27
Non-EU27 Europe
North America
Asia-Pacific
Middle East + Africa
€700 million
EO data and services sales in the Climate, Environment and Biodiversity segment are expected to exceed
€1 billion by 2031. The average predicted yearly growth exceeds 4% and is similar across all regions
and all years. North America is expected to remain the largest geographical actor in the forecast,
building on its well established market share.
The growth in this sector is driven by initiatives such as the Paris Agreement, the Global Environment
Facility (GEF), and the SDGs, which drive demand for environment and climate related applications
in institutions and companies across the world. Regions with the fastest forecasted growth include
Asia-Pacific and Non-EU27 Europe, in part driven by increased capabilities of local service providers
to address climate, environment and biodiversity related needs and applications.
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
EO utilisation for ESG practices and court proceedings is expected to grow
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
CLIMATE, ENVIRONMENT, AND BIODIVERSITY63EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
DestinE will use unprecedented EO and AI capabilities to address climate
change
The European Commission's flagship initiative, Destination Earth (DestinE), aims to create an exceptionally
precise digital representation of Earth by the end of this decade. This model's purpose is to observe
and simulate both natural processes and human behaviours, facilitating the testing of scenarios for more
sustainable development and the support of European environmental policies. DestinE aligns with the
European Commission's Green Deal and Digital Strategy, contributing to the twin transitions (both green
and digital) by monitoring and predicting the interplay between nature and human activities on a global
scale. This initiative will allow users to explore the consequences of different strategies to tackle climate
change by testing a range of scenarios and mitigation strategies.
DestinE will enhance our readiness to address significant natural calamities, adjust to climate change
and forecast the socioeconomic consequences. Additionally, this endeavour plays a crucial role in the
European Data Strategy by centralising access to valuable data resources throughout Europe.
The already powerful climate modelling and forecasting tools will be
further strengthened/renovated
According to the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) factsheet on
reanalysis (2023), it is an important process that will improve climate modelling and forecasting tools.
It compiles comprehensive historical weather and climate data by blending past observations with
previous short-term weather forecasts to rerun modern forecasting models. These datasets, often called
'maps without gaps’, offer a globally complete and time-consistent view of Earth's past conditions filling
gaps in the observational record in a consistent time frame, minimising erroneous signals of change.
Reanalysis is crucial for understanding climate change and extreme weather events since historical
observations. Users can access ECMWF (European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts)
reanalysis data through the EU-funded Copernicus Climate Change Service, notably ERA5, which
covers data from 1940 onward and provides information on various Earth variables. Reanalysis data
find application in climate monitoring, research, education, policymaking and industry sectors like
renewable energy and agriculture. Future developments include detailed datasets based on ERA5 and
the planning of ERA6, a coupled reanalysis incorporating both atmospheric and ocean observations for
a more balanced Earth system climate reconstruction.
0
200
400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€
Environmental resources management Environmental impact assessment and ESG
Environmental auditing Ecosystems monitoring
Climate change mitigation and adaptation EO-based climate modelling
Climate monitoring and forecasting
0
200
400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application
Environmental resources management Environmental impact assessment and ESG
Environmental auditing Ecosystems monitoring
Climate change mitigation and adaptation EO-based climate modelling
Climate monitoring and forecasting
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application 2022
Environmental ressources management
Environmental impact assessments and ESG
Environmental auditing
Ecosystem monitoring
Climate change mitigation and adaptation
EO-based climate modelling
15%
6%8%
8%
6%
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region 2022
EU27
Non-EU27 Europe
North America
Asia-Pacific
Middle East + Africa
8%
10%
10%
16%
20%
€700 million€700 million
Developments in technology will improve the significance of EO
in the field of climate modelling and forecasting
Predicted growth is similar across the applications with an average of over 4% per year. Climate related
applications, due to the increased demand for specialised risk modelling and climate resilience
building, are forecasted to retain the majority of market share. Service providers that are able to use and
interpret climate projections, and turn these into actionable insights, will continue to be high demand in
the coming decade.
Slightly higher growth of around 5% per year is forecasted for environmental and ecosystem monitoring
applications as uptake opportunities are increasing worldwide, driven by regulations and commercial
market demands, which for example require monitoring of habitat degradation and impact on natural
resources. Space-based data and services provide an economical alternative to in-situ data collection,
further driving the need for such services in this segment.
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
64CLIMATE, ENVIRONMENT, AND BIODIVERSITY
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
Improvements in the use and integration of data will drive the EO market
while coastal ecosystems will increasingly be monitored
Coastal areas will be increasingly monitored, with EO playing a crucial role
in the process
Coastal ecosystems serve key roles as reservoirs of biodiversity and provide ecosystems services for
millions of people such as coastal protection against wave action, and recreational activities. However,
many factors are affecting these fragile ecosystems such as sea-level rise, sea temperature rise, pollution
and contamination, recreational activities, unsustainable fishing practices and urbanisation. These factor
make it a particularly sensitive area and its evolution can be dramatic, which is why focus is increasingly
being directed towards these ecosystems.
In parallel, the role of EO data in monitoring the above factors is also important. Such data complement
field measurements and provide useful information to map the hydromorphological (freshwater
discharge, currents, shoreline evolution), physico-chemical (water transparency, temperature, salinity,
oxygen, nutrients, and pollutants), and biological (habitats, phytoplankton blooms) properties of the
coastal zones.
The evolution of technology and integration of various data sources with
EO will push the boundaries of ecosystem monitoring applications
In the coming years, the biodiversity and ecosystems monitoring markets will experiment significant
growth, involving a growing demand for data, including EO data. However, the exact role of EO data in
this expanding market is difficult to predict as it depends on the evolution of various factors.
A key factor is the integration of EO data with citizen science initiatives and crowdsourcing platforms,
which facilitates large-scale data collection and engages the public in biodiversity monitoring. This
collaborative approach is already manifesting in projects including water resources, forest and land use
monitoring. Additionally, the field is witnessing a significant evolution of in-situ technologies which
are increasingly being merged with EO technologies to enhance ecosystem monitoring across various
applications. One of latest interesting developments in this field is the monitoring of environmental DNA
(eDNA) which are the traces of DNA that organisms leave as they move through their environment.
Furthermore, the consolidation of diverse data sources into single platforms, as demonstrated by
initiatives such as the EuropaBON project, which integrates data streams to support policy, promise to
significantly elevate data quality. Lastly, as technology improves, with the evolution of Sentinel missions
and the anticipated launch of private satellite constellations, EO data quality will also improve, which
is a critical element in the success of ecosystems monitoring.
© ESA
© iStock
CLIMATE, ENVIRONMENT, AND BIODIVERSITY65EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
EUROPEAN SYSTEMS
Current usage of Galileo and Copernicus in the Climate, Environment
and Biodiversity segment
Current usage of EGNSS for climate services
Although there is limited use of GNSS and thus EGNSS within the climate domain, several techniques
such as GNSS radio occultation sounding and GNSS Reflectometry support climate modelling. Both
techniques can benefit from improved performances offered by Galileo and its services. More specifically,
Galileo provides enhanced signal availability and accuracy at high latitudes compared with other GNSS
systems. This is particularly important for climate modelling, as accurate positioning data in these
regions helps scientists monitor and predict climate changes happening in polar regions. Additionally,
Galileo offers faster and more frequent updates of positioning information, enabling more rapid
updates of meteorological measurements. This is crucial for real-time monitoring, forecasting and early
warning systems.
Current usage of EGNSS for biodiversity monitoring
Biologists, scientific researchers, or conservation agencies are interested to remotely monitor the
relatively fine-scale migratory patterns of free-range animals. EGNSS represents an ideal technology
to track their location. By attaching an EGNSS-enabled tracker to a collar, harness, or directly to the
animal, data on its location can be continuously collected and analysed. This helps us better understand
what (potentially endangered) animals need to be healthy and thrive in their environment.
High Accuracy
Service
Greater Service
Availability
More robust
positioning
GalileoGalileo
Dual-
frequency
EGNOS
Sentinels
Copernicus Services
Marine
(CMEMS)
Land
(CLMS)
Atmosphere
(CAMS)
Climate Change
(C3S)
Sentinel-2Sentinel-1 Sentinel-3 Sentinel-6Sentinel-5P
Current usage of Copernicus for environmental monitoring
Extensive usage of Copernicus data and services is made for the purposes of environmental
monitoring. A vast range of data is used or can be used, depending on the subject of the environmental
regulation or law at hand (e.g. air quality, waste management and atmospheric emissions). This range
of possibilities offered by space technologies to face environmental and climate challenges is detailed
in the UN report on EU Space supporting a world of 8 billion people.
Data can also be provided to support Member States and bodies in reporting under directives. This is
the case, for example, of the European Marine Observation and Data Network (EMODnet) catalogue
released in June 2021 by the Copernicus Marine Service (CMEMS). The catalogue aims to support
Member States in the implementation of the Marine Safety Framework Directive which itself also
includes environmental protection.
Current usage of Copernicus for climate services
The European Climate Adaptation Platform Climate-ADAPT is a partnership between the European
Commission and the European Environment Agency (EEA). Climate-ADAPT is maintained by the EEA
with the support of the European Topic Centre on Climate Change Impacts, Vulnerability and Adaptation
(ETC/CCA). The platform uses C3S data and aims to support Europe in its adaption to climate change
by helping users access and share data and information on topics such as expected climate change in
Europe, current and future vulnerability of regions and sectors, national and transnational adaptation
strategies and actions, adaptation case studies and potential adaptation options and tools that support
adaptation planning.
Current usage of Copernicus for biodiversity monitoring
The Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) project Sectoral Information System (SIS) for Global
Biodiversity is developing tailored climate information for the biodiversity sector to support the fight
against biodiversity loss.
Additionally, the CLMS released the High Resolution Vegetation Phenology and Productivity
(HR-VPP) service in 2021, which improves the monitoring of vegetation dynamics and allows the
assessment of climatic as well as anthropogenic impacts on ecosystems.
Terminology used on this page is explained in Annex 2 for both GNSS and EO performance parameters.
66CLIMATE, ENVIRONMENT, AND BIODIVERSITY
EUROPEAN PROJECTS
Several European-funded projects utilise EO to propose solutions
in support of environment and biodiversity
MyEUSPACE Competition: Our green planet
MyEUSPACE is a competition organised by EUSPA in 2023 addressing environmental challenges
and sustainable life. The solutions aim to contribute to the implementation of the European Green
Deal and play a central role in the green transformation of corporations.
The competition supports the development of innovative commercial solutions – such as mobile
apps or hardware-based solutions – that leverage EU Space data from Galileo and/or Copernicus.
Applicants could participate in the contest with an idea, a prototype or a product, depending on the
maturity of the solution at the time of the submission.
An interesting outcome of this competition is the product Waterjade, which aims to forecast water
inflow from the upstream catchment to an industrial plant in order to optimise water abstraction and
storage. Another project, currently at prototype stage, is Overview. This is a software platform that
allows users to access, compute and visualise environmental data over any time scale and location
for which data is available. The objective is to make it simple for users to work with Copernicus and
other environmental data in a fast and intuitive way.
More information available at: https://www.euspa.europa.eu/cassinichallenges
CASSINI Maritime Prize
Space-based remote sensing technologies and data can play a significant role in detecting, tracking
and mapping concentrations of plastics, identifying hotspots and sources of the litter, detecting
proxies of potential plastic pollution and can contribute to the effective deployment of clean-up
solutions.
The Cassini Maritime prize aimed to stimulate the development of innovative solutions – using EU
Space Programme data – to solve problems related to the detection, monitoring and the removal
of microplastics, plastic litter as well as of larger items in rivers, shores and coastal zones.
In November 2023, the three winners EOMAP, GEOMATYS, and SCIDRONES were each
awarded €950 000, which will be used to further develop, scale up and, ultimately, accelerate the
commercialisation and promotion of their applications. Solutions included differentiating between
plastic pollution and natural debris using Copernicus multi-spectral data, mapping and monitoring
plastic pollution in real-time using Copernicus and other data sources, as well as detecting debris at
sea and forecasting its drift by coupling ocean current and wind models with satellite observations.
More information available at: https://www.euspa.europa.eu/newsroom/news/eu-space-applications-
fish-plastics-out-our-oceans-and-rivers
Birdwatch: Habitat sustainability of farmland birds
Birdwatch is a Copernicus-based service aiming to improve the habitat of farmland birds via
satellite-enabled monitoring, evaluation and optimisation of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP)
greening measures.
Birdwatch has a comprehensive mission to enhance biodiversity, improve farmland ecosystems,
and encourage sustainable farming. The product combines both rigorous species distribution
modelling together with EO data-based geospatial features of the individual farmland parcels
to provide stakeholders with maps of bird habitat suitability in agricultural areas. It then helps to
identify appropriate greening measures by considering the associated economic consequences. It
also assists in evidence-based policymaking and fosters communication between scientists, farmers
and authorities.
More information available at: https://birdwatch-europe.org/
Marco-Bolo: Observing a new way to explore marine biodiversity
MARCO-BOLO (Marine Coastal Biodiversity Long-term Observations) aims to structure and
strengthen European coastal and marine biodiversity observation capabilities, linking them to
global efforts to understand and restore ocean health, hence ensuring that outputs respond to explicit
stakeholder needs from policy, planning and industry. It will connect existing initiatives, optimise and
improve methods, and further innovate technologies (remote sensing, eDNA, robotics, and optical
and acoustic observations) to understand and restore ocean health.
MARCO BOLO results will be designed to build upon existing capabilities and infrastructures, and to
be relevant to existing frameworks so that outputs can be easily integrated into national, regional (EU
and adjacent sea basins), and global observation systems, with no delay, ensuring the reusability of
the investments Europe is already making in data generation.
More information available at: https://marcobolo-project.eu/
Horizon Europe,
a programme of the
European Union
Horizon Europe,
a programme of the
European Union
CLIMATE, ENVIRONMENT, AND BIODIVERSITY67EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
Several European funded projects utilise EO to propose solutions
in support of climate and biodiversity
EUROPEAN PROJECTS
100K TREEs
The ambition of the HORIZON Europe project 100KTREEs is to make cities a better and healthier
place to live by encouraging municipalities to plant more trees and to optimise the impact of tree
planting.
100KTREEs will develop mapping and modelling tools to optimise the planting of trees and to
monitor their health, based on satellite data from the Copernicus EU space programme and in-situ
data. By assigning monetary value to the key attributes of a tree, e.g. pollution absorption, cooling
effect, noise abatement, flood risk reduction and increased biodiversity, a number of business cases
will be developed for two partner cities.
Sofia (Bulgaria) and Copenhagen (Denmark) are the two metropolitan use cases where technical and
socio-economic approach of 100KTREES will be tested and demonstrated. The team will support
cities by mapping the existing trees and by showing a business case for planting new trees, as well
as attracting third party sponsorships to make it happen.
More information available at: https://www.100ktrees.eu/
EuropaBON: integrating data streams to support policy
Biodiversity loss has severe impacts on ecosystem services and humans. Several EU policies and
initiatives are oriented towards an objective, integrated and permanently updated biodiversity and
ecosystem service data. However, biodiversity observation is restricted by a sequence of gaps.
The EU-funded EuropaBON (Europa Biodiversity Observation Network) project will design a new
structure for monitoring biodiversity and ecosystem services, including remote sensing.
It will model essential variables to integrate different reporting streams, data sources and
monitoring strategies. Project partners will deliver solid knowledge about the dimensions of
biodiversity change across space and time to support decision-making. Based on stakeholders’
engagement and knowledge exchange, EuropaBON will assess existing monitoring efforts, identify
user and policy needs, and investigate the feasibility of a European coordination centre of monitoring
operations.
More information available at: https://europabon.org/
E-shape, strengthens the benefits for Europe of GEO
E-shape is a unique initiative that brought together decades of public investment in EO and in cloud
capabilities into services for decision-makers, citizens, industry and researchers.
Within the project, 37 pilot applications under seven thematic areas addressed societal challenges,
fostered entrepreneurship and supported sustainable development.
Climate was one of e-shape’s thematic areas. Interesting pilots such as one on urban resilience to
extreme weather aimed to increase the preparedness of city authorities and decrease the vulnerability
of urban population to hazardous weather events and risks caused by climate variability and climate
change. Another interesting pilot involved the super resolution air quality monitoring service which
aims to provide a competitive service that fills the gap between the local in-situ sensors data, and the
lower resolution, global satellite data.
More information available at: https://e-shape.eu/
Hermosa project for ecosystems restoration
The project initially started in 2018 with an ESA Business Applications kick-start activity, “EO-li -
Earth Observation based location identifier”.
It is now an open-source service platform that supports ecosystem restoration and biodiversity
conservation locally and globally. The concept appeals to several customer groups, such as
investors and financial institutions that want to invest in reforestation activities, local farmers who
offer their land, planting companies that carry out the various projects on-site and governments that
are committed to national and international initiatives in the context of mitigating or adapting to
climate change and sustainable development, among numerous other stakeholders.
More information available at: https://hermosa.mundialis.de
Horizon Europe,
a programme of the
European Union
EUROPAB N
68CLIMATE, ENVIRONMENT, AND BIODIVERSITY
REFERENCE CHARTS
Revenue from EO data sales by application
Revenue from EO services sales by application
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
Environmental resources management Environmental impact assessment and ESG
Environmental auditing Ecosystems monitoring
Climate change mitigation and adaptation EO-based climate modelling
Climate monitoring and forecasting
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
€ (millions)
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
Environmental resources management Environmental impact assessment and ESG
Environmental auditing Ecosystems monitoring
Climate change mitigation and adaptation EO-based climate modelling
Climate monitoring and forecasting
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
€ (millions)
1 400
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application
1 400
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
Environmental resources management Environmental impact assessment and ESG
Environmental auditing Ecosystems monitoring
Climate change mitigation and adaptation EO-based climate modelling
Climate monitoring and forecasting
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
€ (millions)
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
Environmental resources management Environmental impact assessment and ESG
Environmental auditing Ecosystems monitoring
Climate change mitigation and adaptation EO-based climate modelling
Climate monitoring and forecasting
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application
Revenue from EO services sales by region
Revenue from EO data sales by region
2032 2033
ion
ssessment and ESG
lling
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
2032 2033
ssessment and ESG
lling
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
plication Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
2032 2033
ion
ssessment and ESG
lling
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
2032 2033
ssessment and ESG
lling
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
plication
1 400
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
CONSUMER SOLUTIONS,
TOURISM AND HEALTH
CONSUMER SOLUTIONS DEVICES AND APPLICATIONS
EO- and GNSS-enabled consumer solutions encompass a wide range of applications
catering to diverse user needs and preferences (e.g., navigation and tracking, health and
lifestyle, tourism, etc.). These applications are supported by various types of connected
devices, primarily smartphones and wearables, as well as other specialised equipment
like tablets, personal tracking devices, digital cameras and portable computers.
Advancements in Internet of Things (IoT) allow virtually any physical device to become
connected to one another. This is best exemplified by the advent of consumer robotics.
Other emerging trends include Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML),
which open up new layers of possibilities in offering greater connectivity and capabilities
to these devices and functionalities, thus, further enhancing well-being and lifestyle.
Driven by technological advancements and cost reduction, the increasing accessibility of
satellite imagery to the general public in recent years has facilitated the commercialisation
of Earth Observation data and has pushed boundaries on how such data can be used in
users’ day-to-day lives in various domains.
What you can read in this chapter
• Key trends: Space data gains momentum in consumers’ daily lives.
• User perspective: Unlocking opportunities: satellite data for mobile apps, geo-location
revenues, and sustainable tourism.
• Industry: Consumer solutions, health and tourism value chains.
• Recent developments: Smartphone shipments continue to dominate despite
experiencing a slowdown; growing digitalisation sustains the market growth, while EO
is playing a growing role in collaborative decision-making.
• Future market evolution: Edge and quantum computing integration with space
technologies is transforming the future of data processing and mobile devices while
EO revenues continue growing and space technologies drive inclusivity, diversity and
equality in the society.
• European systems: Current usage of Galileo and Copernicus in consumer solutions,
tourism and health.
• European Projects: EUSPA continues to support to SMEs and start-ups to develop
GNSS and EO applications for consumer solutions, tourism and health.
• Reference charts: Yearly evolution of installed base of GNSS devices and revenues as
well as EO revenues by application and region.
Application descriptions can be found in Annex 3Corporate
• Location-based billing
• Geo-advertising
• Mapping and GIS
• Workforce managementHealth, Lifestyle & Tourism
• Air quality monitoring
• Games
• Geo-tagging
• mHealth
• Safety and emergency
• Social networks
• Sport, fitness and wellness
incl. specialist support tracking
• UV monitoring
• Tourism FruitionRobotics
• Consumer robotics
• Enhanced humanNavigation & Tracking
• Navigation for smartphone users
• Personal & asset tracking
• Visually impaired support 69
© pexels.comLegend
EO application
GNSS application
Synergetic application
(combined use of EO and GNSS)
70CONSUMER SOLUTIONS, TOURISM AND HEALTH
KEY TRENDS
The rise of Super Apps – one app for all
Super apps as a concept are growing in popularity in Europe. These apps provide users with a seamlessly
integrated experience via a one-stop solution that solves different needs and purposes simultaneously.
The rise of super apps will change the way people interact with their phones, sincemany different applications
can be integrated into one, such as social and communication platforms, e-commerce, transport and ride-
hailing services, financial services, food delivery, bill and utility management and healthcare services.
Large companies such as Meta and Amazon have started integrating such features, by going a step
further from the initial purpose of their platform. More recently, Twitter announced that it is planning to
build its super app, X, which will provide a range of services from social networks to purchase apps while
offering personalised entertainment according to the user’s location and preferences.
In this regard, the role of geolocation, cybersecurity and privacy is extremely important since user’s personal
data is aggregated in a single platform, which will enable the seamless operation of such super apps.
Uncovering the link between climate change, air quality and asthma: the key
role of Copernicus
Climate change may affect and worsen air quality through increasing temperature, air pollution and
increasing risk of wildfires, all of which may exacerbate asthma attacks, a condition already affecting 30
million Europeans. In this context, Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service (CAMS) represents a
key source of information to monitor and address climate change and health issues that it might cause.
As the healthcare sector embraces Copernicus data, a new era of understanding and tackling health-
related challenges is set to unfold.
The global pharmaceutical company Teva, is investigating the link between wildfire air pollution and
asthma triggers with the help of the Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service (CAMS).
CAMS, which offers comprehensive atmospheric data, aids Teva's research by providing insights into
global wildfires and air pollution. This collaboration represents a major step forward in addressing
respiratory diseases amid climate change.
To date, the integration of innovative technologies, such as 5G connectivity, robotics, augmented
reality (AR), and 3D printing, is poised to revolutionise healthcare and disease monitoring. This
transformation is bolstered by the harnessing of big data platforms and advanced analytics, facilitating
more robust and proactive public health efforts. Notably, apps like GIDEON's interactive disease outbreak
and distribution map are already in use and continually updated with fresh data. Similarly, Lymeapp, a
mobile and web-based app, provides users with risk maps for their specific locations, exemplifying the
synergy between technology and public health for enhanced monitoring and response.
Generative AI and its potential to increase the commercialisation of EO in mobile apps
In recent years, there has been a greater demand for personalised consumer experiences. Through
the use of Generative AI, a type of AI system that uses advanced Machine Learning (ML) algorithms,
prominent applications such as chatGPT, DALL-E, BART and Stability Diffusion, have been on the rise,
enabling the generation of text, images or other media on immediate demand.
AI and ML have indeed emerged as prominent trends in mobile app development, enabling optimised
search processes, integrating audio or video recognition and learning user behaviour patterns in
order to provide better services and create intelligent digital assistants. Moreover, these apps are
accessible to specific geolocation and user groups, enabling them to answer diverse questions and
assist with day-to-day tasks for creators, consultants, researchers, and more. This integration not only
enhances productivity, but also provides tailored content to meet specific user needs.
As the demand for exceptional mobile experience rises, leveraging this technology can support
developers in creating seamless, personalised and highly engaging apps that cater to the evolving needs
of users. With the integration of high-resolution satellite imagery to recreate real-world locations or
generate fictional landscapes, app creators can enhance the authenticity, leading to a more captivating
user experience.
The rise of EO and digital twins in the gaming and tourism world
The use of digital twins has seen a significant expansion thanks to the ability to recreate the real
world with remarkable visualisations and great attention to detail. In the gaming world, game
developers and the creators of metaverse environments have begun to utilise EO in order to produce
photorealistic digital 3D replicas of real localities, including video game textures and terrain models.
The same technology is also currently used in the tourism sector to provide visitors with a more
personalised experience specifically tailored to each individual. Moreover, it can bring about positive
effects on the protection, conservation, informational and awareness aspects of tourism activities.
Additionally, high-resolution imagery can be used to recreate
real-world locations or generate fictional landscapes based
on actual geographical features. With the support of AI, it
is possible to enhance VR in digital twins, creating a more
immersive experience, with more scalable and accurate virtual
worlds, including the interaction with 3D digital objects and 3D
virtual avatars. Importing space data into a metaverse project
may accelerate the development and recreation of natural
ecosystems, seasons, weather and climate conditions.
Space data gains momentum in consumers’ daily lives
Key market trends
• Apps are becoming more and more integrated, enabling the use of a single app for multiple services
• Generative AI is revolutionising mobile apps development through advanced Machine Learning
• The use of EO and GNSS in healthcare provides an environmental dimension to patient care
• The rise of digital twins in the gaming world has pushed developers to use satellite imagery for the development of better visualisation graphics and 3D models
© iStock
CONSUMER SOLUTIONS, TOURISM AND HEALTH71EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
USER PERSPECTIVE
Sources of key EO and GNSS user requirements
The key EO and GNSS user requirements for the different application
groups within the consumer solutions, tourism and health segment
are, at EU level, collected using a harmonised procedure. Information is
collected through extensive interactions with user groups, providers and
experts in a continuous process culminating at the User Consultation
Platforms (UCP). All relevant requirements are documented in detail and
updated regularly within the Report on Consumer Solutions user needs
and requirements.
User requirements for Earth Observation (EO) services and products – as
well as their evolution – are now also collected through the UCP. The
process covers the EO user needs and requirements of commercial users
based on inputs from industry experts and user groups, mirroring the
existing process implemented for GNSS.
Moreover, the collection of specific requirements for Copernicus services and products is supported by
an integrated process that involves different channels: (i) dedicated studies (e.g. "NEXTSPACE" project,
"Copernicus for EC (C4EC)" study, Commission Staff Working Document on user needs); (ii) targeted
consultations organised by the European Commission or the entrusted entities with the relevant
communities; and (iii) regular and structured exchanges among representatives of the Copernicus
governance structure and Member States through the Copernicus User Forum.
Unlocking Opportunities: Satellite Data for Mobile Apps, Geo-Location
Revenues, and Sustainable Tourism
Sustainable tourism must integrate EO data, says UN World Tourism
Organisation
The Baseline Report on the Integration of Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns into
Tourism Policies by the UNWTO mandates the incorporation of geospatial data to measure and
visualise the impacts of tourism on the environment for the tourism industry in order to ensure
sustainable practices within the sector.
The World Tourism Organisation has been exploring the possibilities of using satellite data and
its potential to improve tourism planning, including in helping tour operators minimise their
environmental impact. For example, through the partnership with Google Earth, the WTO has
been able to map out tourist attractions and conservation areas, providing a comprehensive
overview of the environment.
In this sense, EO has been revolutionising sustainable tourism by enabling multi-level
environmental monitoring and analysis. These insights will enable tourism industry stakeholders
to make well-informed decisions about the future of tourism by utilising the collected data on
its impacts on natural resources, biodiversity and the environment at large.
Space technology: a key solution for sustainable
development in a growing world
The global population is expected to reach 9 billion by 2037, raising
concerns about its impact on the environment and sustainability.
The “Contribution to the Space2030 Agenda” report by EUSPA, in
collaboration with the United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs
(UNOOSA), highlights that space technology holds the key to
addressing these challenges while ensuring sustainable development.
In alignment with global agendas such as the 2030 SDGs or the Paris
Agreement, the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
(COPUOS) has ratified the “Space2030” Agenda, in which space data
from programmes such as Copernicus, Galileo, EGNOS, and GOVSATCOM
can tackle issues such as food security, water management, climate change, and environmental
sustainability in a world of growing population.
The report highlights how consumer devices, supported by GNSS and EO, can contribute to the
fulfilment of the sustainable urbanisation challenge, sustain a better environmental monitoring and
enhance more effective healthcare systems.
Further information on this report is available on page 24.
Mobile apps support sustainable tourism practices
From planning to protecting, several apps have been developed already integrating EO and GNSS
to support achieving sustainable development goals (SDGs) in the tourism sector and, thus,
playing an important role in the management of tourism sites and the impact of tourism on
natural habitats.
These mobile apps can give end users information on of their environmental footprint and can
revolutionise the travel market, by transforming the way travellers plan, book and navigate their trips.
For instance, thanks to the significant investments that both private and public enterprises have
made in bike-sharing apps such as Vélib’ in France or nextbike in several European cities, users
can enjoy a stress-free and green way to get around when on holiday.
Additionally, sustainable destination information apps can be used to aid the environmental
education of tourists and residents, while interactive guide maps or activity routes apps can
show the location of the attractions, plan routes and provide easy-to-access information on
accommodation, transportation and local culinary specialities, among others.
All these apps will help the surge of green tourism and bring value to the sector. It is denoted
that 66% of consumers globally want to have a positive impact on the environment in their daily
lives and, thus, are more inclined to engage in services and products that are participating in
sustainability efforts, including in tourism.
UNITED NATIONS
OFFICE FOR OUTER SPACE AFFAIRS
UNITED NATIONS
CONTRIBUTION TO THE “SPACE2030” AGENDA
EU SPACE
SUPPORTING A WORLD OF
8 BILLION PEOPLE
72CONSUMER SOLUTIONS, TOURISM AND HEALTH
INDUSTRY
COMPONENT
AND RECEIVER
MANUFACTURERS
DEVICE
INTEGRATORS
AND VENDORS
APP DEVELOPERS/
RETAILERS USERS
SERVICE &
CONTENT
PROVIDERS
APP STORES
OPERATING
SYSTEM
DEVELOPERS
• BEIJING BDSTAR
NAVIGATION
• BROADCOM
• INFINEON*
• INTEL
• LEADTEK RESEARCH
• MEDIATEK
• NIHON DEMPA KOGYO
• NXP
SEMICONDUCTORS*
• QUALCOMM
• QUECTEL WIRELESS
• SAMSUNG
• SEIKO EPSON
• SIERRA WIRELESS
• SITRONIX TECHNOLOGY
• SONY
• SPREADTRUM
COMMUNICATIONS
• STMICROELECTRONICS*
• U-BLOX*
• UNISTRONG GNSS
• YAGEO
• APPLE (IOS)
• CANONICAL*
(UBUNTU)
• GOOGLE (ANDROID)
• JOLLA* (SAILFISH)
• LINUX FOUNDATION
(LINUX)
• MICROSOFT
(WINDOWS)
GNSS MOBILE
NETWORK OPERATORS
AND ASSISTANCE DATA
PROVIDERS:
• AT&T MOBILITY
• KDDI
• ORANGE*
• SOFTBANK
• TELEFÓNICA*
• VERIZON WIRELESS
• VODAFONE*
GENERAL APP
DEVELOPERS:
• ALIBABA
• APPLE
• GOOGLE
• META
• MICROSOFT
• SAMSUNG
• SUPERCELL*
• TENCENT
• TRIPADVISOR
• XIAOMI
• Many small app
developers
mCOMMERCE:
• ALIBABA
• AMAZON
• EBAY
• PAYPAL
• RAKUTEN
• ZALANDO*
mHEALTH:
• CALM
• FITBIT
• FLO HEALTH*
• HEADSPACE
• MYFITNESSPAL
RETAILERS:
AIRLINES, BANKS,
GENERAL
RETAILERS, MEDIA
COMPANIES, MOBILE
NETWORK OPERATORS,
TRANSPORT
PROVIDERS, VEHICLE
MANUFACTURERS
• AMAZON APPSTORE
• APPLE APP STORE
• GOOGLE PLAY
• HUAWEI
APPGALLERY
• MICROSOFT STORE
• TENCENT APPSTORE
SMARTPHONE/
TABLETS:
• ALPHABET
• APPLE
• HUAWEI
• LENOVO
• LG
• NOKIA
• OPPO
• SAMSUNG
• SONY
• VIVO
• XIAOMI
• ZTE
WEARABLES:
• ALPHABET
• APPLE
• AMER SPORTS*
• GARMIN
• LG
• POLAR*
• SAMSUNG
• SUUNTO*
• XIAOMI
PEOPLE
TRACKING DEVICE
MANUFACTURERS
ORIGINAL DESIGN
MANUFACTURERS
CAMERA
MANUFACTURERS
PC MANUFACTURERS
• CITIZENS
• ELDERLY AND
VULNERABLE GROUPS
• TOURISTS
• SPORT ENTHUSIASTS
• WORKFORCE
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
Consumer Solutions, Tourism and Health GNSS Value Chain 1
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in GNSS downstream activities.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 23 for a comprehensive description of the GNSS value chain and how to interpret them at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the company, though the actual area of activity might be wider
European2 GNSS industry in the global
arena
European companies STMicroelectronics, Infineon
Technologies and U-Blox were among the top 10
largest businesses in the GNSS component and receiver
sector in 2021. However, Europe’s market share stood
at around 5%, behind North America (50%) and Asia
(45%). Meanwhile, European GNSS system integrators
(e.g. smartphone and wearable manufacturers)
maintained around 5% of the segment turnover in 2021
behind Asia (60%) and North America (35%).
GNSS
CONSUMER SOLUTIONS, TOURISM AND HEALTH73EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
INDUSTRY
Consumer Solutions, Tourism and Health EO Value Chain 1
EARTH
OBSERVATION DATA PROVIDERS
EO PRODUCTS
AND SERVICES
PROVIDERS
END USERS
PLATFORM
PROVIDERS
INFORMATION
PROVIDERS
INFRASTRUCTURE
PROVIDERS
• ACCUWEATHER
• AIRBUS*
• CGI
• DRAXIS*
• SM GEODIS*
• SMARTPHONE
DEVELOPERS
• APP DEVELOPERS
• CITIZENS
• ELDERLY AND
VULNERABLE GROUPS
• TOURISTS
• SPORT ENTHUSIASTS
• WORKFORCE
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
• AIRBUS*
• BIKEMAPPS*
• CGI
• DEEPTRACE
TECHNOLOGIES*
• DATEL*
• MAXAR
• COPERNICUS
ATMOSPHERE
MONITORING SERVICE
(CAMS)*
• COPERNICUS CLIMATE
CHANGE SERVICE
(C3S)*
• AWS
• CLOUDFERRO*
• GOOGLE CLOUD
PLATFORM
• IBM CLOUD
• MICROSOFT AZURE
• T-SYSTEMS*
• FEDERATED
INFRASTRUCTURE
(E.G. GAIA-X)*
• SENTINEL
COLLABORATIVE
GROUND SEGMENT*
• AIRBUS*
• BLACKSKY
• CAPELLA SPACE
• CGSTL
• GEOSAT*
• E-GEOS*
• ICEYE*
• MAXAR
• PLANET
• UMBRA
MAP PROVIDERS:
APPLE, GOOGLE, HERE*,
MAPQUEST,
MICROSOFT,
OPENSTREETMAP*,
TOMTOM*
• COPERNICUS
SENTINELS*
• COSMO-SKYMED (ASI)*
• LANDSAT (USGS)
• METEOSAT
(EUMETSAT)*
• RADARSAT (CSA)
• RELEVANT IN-SITU
NETWORKS
• OTHER RELEVANT
EUROPEAN NATIONAL
MISSIONS
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in EO downstream activities.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 13 for a comprehensive description of the EO value chain and how to interpret them at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the company, though the actual area of activity might be wider.
European2 EO industry in the global arena
In 2021, European EO companies accounted almost a third of the global market
share. Top European companies in this segment include Airbus, Hispasat, and ICEYE.
Meanwhile, North American companies are still dominating the market, enjoying around
60% of the global share.
• ADAM*
• PIESAT
• CLEOS*
• CLOUDEO*
• CREODIAS*
• MAXAR
• NOR*
• PLANET EXPLORER
• SENTINEL HUB*
(SINERGISE)
• TERRADUE*
• UP42*
• VITO*
• WEKEO*
74CONSUMER SOLUTIONS, TOURISM AND HEALTH
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Smartphones continued to dominate the market accounting for around 80% of around 1.5 billion
unit shipments in 2022, significantly exceeding other consumer devices. Nevertheless, their dominance
decreased from 2019 to 2021 due to the increasingly saturated market, the COVID-19 pandemic and
increasing attention on the sustainability of devices (i.e. a focus on longer lifetime). The disruption
of the supply chain is also contributing to the setback, especially concerning semiconductors, and
the suppressing growth in the consumer sector caused by the ongoing international crises, which are
expected to reduce the shipments of smartphones. This is only partially counterbalanced by the growing
uptake of smartphones in less developed regions of the world.
Other GNSS-enabled consumer devices combined amount to over 250 million units in 2022, out of which
around 100 million unit shipments in 2022 are attributed to sports and wearable devices, growing
with a CAGR of 35% between 2012 and 2022. Personal tracking devices continued to grow with a
CAGR of 40% in 2012-2022 boosted by increasing consumer awareness and affordability. Personal
tracking devices and low-power asset trackers, which experienced a slump in 2020 due to COVID-19,
rebounded to their pre-pandemic numbers in 2022 and even surpassed them for low-power asset
trackers. Consumer robotics, which was added as a separate application in 2021, observed strong
growth from 2021 to 2022.
The remaining devices experienced negative growth for the time period observed. Shipments for portable
computers, tablets and digital cameras have been shrinking since 2020, mainly due to the slowdown
in the global economy due to the pandemic, together with the growing maturity of these markets and,
hence, declining consumer demand, particularly for portable computers and digital cameras.
Overall, the market is forecast to continue to grow, thanks to the increasing use of wearables and
digitalisation, particularly in healthcare and tourism. The expected overall effects of these forces can be
visualised in the reference charts at the end of this chapter.
Smartphone shipments continue to dominate while experiencing
a slowdown, the growing digitalisation sustain the market growth
Shipments of GNSS devices by type
aribbean Tablets Sport & Wearables Personal tracking devices
Consumer Robotics Low-Power Asset Tracking Devices Data revenue (smartphones and tablets)**
GNSS-enabled revenues enabled by apps†
**: Only data revenue arising from the use of GNSS-based services considered;
†: Pay-to-download, In-app-purchases and ad revenue from health & lifestyle, navigation & trackings, tourism, and corporate apps
2032 2033
ealth
ety & Emergency
Monitoring
-advertising
ial Networks
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Portable computers Digital cameras
Tablets Sport & Wearables
Personal tracking devices Consumer Robotics
Low-Power Asset Tracking Devices Smartphones
800
1 300
1 800
Units (millions)
Shipments of GNSS devices by type
The hospitality sector relies on robots to improve operation, costs-effectiveness
and guest experience
The market size for the service of autonomous robots in the hospitality sector is projected to grow
significantly. Today, robots are being used in a variety of hotel departments, including housekeeping, food
and beverage and even security. For instance, autonomous robots, such as Pepper or Nao, can provide
smart catering and retail services boosting operational efficiency, enhancing competitiveness as well as
reducing costs.
COVID-19 has further accelerated the adoption of autonomous robots, as they can provide safe and
contactless services, in addition to helping to improve operational efficiency by automating tasks that are
typically done manually. In indoor operations, such robots can use functionalities such
as inertial sensors, Lidar or simultaneous localisation and mapping (SLAM) to navigate.
AI is changing the way businesses operate in the field of robotics and hospitality by
improving customer experience, brand awareness and customer loyalty. Western
cultures are starting to adopt more autonomous robots in hospitality, although at a
slower pace than Asia. Factors such as cost, technological capabilities and customer
acceptance play a role in determining the extent to which autonomous robots are
integrated into hospitality operations.
Digitalisation is at the forefront of healthcare innovation
The rise of AR and VR in health applications, in parallel with the integration of space technologies, will
provide a better patient experience, increase compliance with treatment and improve patient outcomes,
including the training and performance of medical treatments by healthcare professionals.
Software for virtual and augmented reality surgery has been developed, enabling doctors and other
healthcare providers to be better prepared, while medical students can receive greater amounts of surgical
training than normally possible with actual patients. Geospatial mapping and digital twins capabilities
enabled by GNSS and EO can enhance training and preparation experiences by modelling organs, the
immune system, and many other physical characteristics of a patient or the surrounding locations.
The growth in healthcare data has enabled the rise and use of healthcare databases, which are paving
the way for the implementation of AI in the healthcare industry. The integration of AI can lead to better
care outcomes and improve the productivity and efficiency of care delivery. In synergies with satellite
data, AI can enhance pre-operative planning and patient monitoring, as well as enabling telemedicine and
remote surgeries. This digitalisation of healthcare will ultimately require the integration of satellite-
enabled solutions such as IoT, cloud computing and access to large databases for physicians.
© unsplash.com
CONSUMER SOLUTIONS, TOURISM AND HEALTH75EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
0
40
80
120
160
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
EO-enabled app revenues
Personal & asset tracking Visually impaired support mHealth
Sport, Fitness & Wellness (sport tracking) Games Safety & Emergency
Geo-Tagging Air quality monitoring UV Monitoring
Workforce Management Billing Geo-advertising
Mapping & GIS
Navigation for smartphone users
Tourism fruition Social Networks
200
300
400
500
600
700
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Earth Observation growing presence in collaborative decision making
How gaming and EO can support solving world problems
Human mappers, especially gamers, offer crowdsourced data that, combined with machine learning
systems, allows mapping to be based on direct visual recognition of elements, as well as the surrounding
region. BlackShore is an example of how game-based crowdsourcing, can deliver accurate, up-to-date
and low-cost map products and data labels based on the crowd-sourced interpretation of satellite
data and aerial imagery to monitor different kinds of needs. Their practical applications range from
mapping forests to detecting illegal fishing, supporting farmers and disaster mapping.
In the past few years, the combination of crowdsourcing and gaming in order to support the reduction of
uncertainties in mapping land cover has seen substantial growth. For instance, IIASA has already been
using games and social networking to build a citizen scientists network (e.g., Cropland Capture, Picture
Pile, FotoQuest Go and LandSense).
Another success story is represented by eBird, a crowd-
sourced bird-watching mobile and desktop application,
developed by Cornell’s ornithology lab, serves as an online
repository of bird observations. The app offers scientists,
researchers, and amateur naturalists immediate access to
real-time data regarding bird distribution and abundance.
Another app that aims to support the scientific community
is iNaturalist.
The growing role of LiDAR in real life applications
The use of LiDAR in smartphones has been growing significantly.
It provides better visualisation and interaction with the user
by scanning and measuring more accurately the distances of
surrounding objects compared to regular laser scan. Particularly
in dark conditions, LiDAR makes it possible to capture superior-
quality photos in low light.
Additionally, LiDAR can be complemented with photogrammetry
(the art and science of extracting 3D information from photographs) and/or a neural radiance field
(NeRF), which enables the creation of 3D objects from two-dimensional photos. The technology has
brought AR to the forefront since it enables virtual taping and measuring of objects, creating a replica of
an object, a scene or a character and showing, for example, how furniture can look around our homes by
scanning and recreating 3D models, as well as enhancing our online shopping experience.
Mobile devices equipped with LiDAR have also been applying EO in the forestry sector for inventory-
related tasks such as individual tree stem measurements, for which LiDAR enables more efficient and
precise data collection, while requiring less time and resources than manual data collection.
Discontinuities in geological structures can be identified through the use of LiDAR in the field using
smartphones. These applications can therefore be very useful for the analysis of geologic natural hazards
and resource management.
EO-enabled app revenues
As a new analysis included for this edition of the Market Report, the global revenue from EO-enabled
apps is predicted to grow to around €600 million by 2033 from around €200 million in 2023 with a
CAGR of 11%. Within consumer solutions, navigation for smartphone users is the largest application,
with revenue projected to increase from €150 million in 2023 to almost €450 million by 2033 with a
CAGR of 11%. Meanwhile, Social networks is the second-ranked category with cumulative revenue of
€55 million over the decade, followed closely by geo-tagging which is expected to grow from almost
€20 million in 2023 to just over €50 million in 2033.
Meanwhile, the rest of the applications combined represent less than 10% of the market, led by personal
and asset tracking and air quality monitoring, which are both expected to almost triple by 2033.
These EO-enabled apps revenues are generated based on a quantitative analysis of EO-enabled mobile
apps, taking into account the downloads of each app delineated by each sub-application, as well as
data on global mobile apps revenues. For each app, the relevance of EO for the functionalities of the app
is considered, which corresponds to the EO-enabled app revenues as illustrated in the graph. Therefore,
the quantified revenues are the share of sales generated by the apps (through in-app purchase, pay-
per-download or advertising) that can be attributed to EO data or services, The reader should note
that, being a new piece of analysis, EO-enabled app revenues are not included in the reference charts
featured on page 81.
© BlackShore
© Treemetrics
EO-enabled app revenues
76CONSUMER SOLUTIONS, TOURISM AND HEALTH
GNSS-enabled revenues enabled by apps†
**: Only data revenue arising from the use of GNSS-based services considered;
†: Pay-to-download, In-app-purchases and ad revenue from health & lifestyle, navigation & trackings, tourism, and corporate apps
0
20
40
60
80
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (billions)
GNSS - enabled app revenues
Personal & asset tracking Visually impaired support mHealth
Sport, Fitness & Wellness (sport tracking) Games Safety & Emergency
Geo-Tagging Air quality monitoring UV Monitoring
Workforce Management Location-based billing Geo-advertising
Mapping & GIS Tourism fruition Social Networks
Navigation for smartphone users
100
150
200
250
300
350
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Portable computers Digital cameras
Tablets Sport & Wearables
Personal tracking devices Consumer Robotics
Low-Power Asset Tracking Devices Smartphones
800
1 300
1 800
Units (millions)
Shipments of GNSS devices by type
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
In comparison with the relatively mature GNSS devices market (see page 74), revenues generated from
GNSS-enabled apps are expected to significantly rise from around €100 billion in 2023 to around
€300 bn by 2033, exhibiting a CAGR of 10%.
The most relevant category of apps remains navigation and tracking apps, with revenue of almost
€80 billion in 2023. This figure is expected to grow to around €230 billion by 2023 (CAGR of 11%),
accounting just over 75% of the market.
Social networks apps were valued at more than €12 billion in 2023, and they are expected to triple in
the upcoming decade, being the second most important category of apps, followed by geo-tagging and
personal and asset tracking.
The other apps in the health, lifestyle, tourism and corporate categories remain niche segments, with
revenues of just 3% of the total.
These GNSS-enabled apps revenues are generated based on a quantitative analysis of GNSS-enabled
mobile apps, taking into account the downloads of each app delineated by each sub-application, as well
as data on global mobile apps revenues. For each app, the relevance of GNSS for the functionalities of
the app is considered, to determine the GNSS-enabled app revenues illustrated in the graph. Therefore,
the quantified revenues represent the share of sales generated by the apps (through in-app purchase,
pay-per-download or advertising) enabled by GNSS technology, The reader should note that associated
revenues are included in the reference charts featured on page 80.
Edge and quantum computing integration with space technologies
transforming the future of data processing and mobile devices
GNSS-enabled app revenues
The future of EO and GNSS with Edge and Quantum computing
Edge computing plays a crucial role in optimising data processing by bringing computations closer to
the source, which reduces the strain on bandwidth and significantly decreases latency. Importantly,
it also improves data security, as it lowers the risk of attack during data exchange between sender and
receiver. In relation to EO and GNSS technologies, edge computing offers several advantages such as on-
device EO data processing, enhanced GNSS accuracy and reliability and real-time GNSS data processing.
The potential integration of quantum technology into smartphones is vital, and in fact the industry is
already moving towards this direction. For instance, Samsung launched the Quantum 2 smartphone in 2021
featuring built-in quantum cryptography technology – a quantum random number generator (QRNG) chipset
– showing how the technology can deliver safer and more secure services for the user. This advancement
aligns with the importance of data integrity and privacy in today's technological landscape. Quantum
computing promises to revolutionise smartphone batteries by accelerating the development of advanced
battery chemistry models. Lighter batteries with higher energy capacities would prolong battery life and thus
provide a better user experience. In the short to mid-term, electronic devices equipped with quantum sensors
(i.e. implementing quantum sensing) are well on their way to replacing our current personal electronics.
As edge computing and quantum technology applications mature, it becomes evident that future
computing devices will be able to operate with optimised resources while prioritising data integrity,
privacy and security.
The growing importance of GNSS and EO for marketing strategy development
Recent years have seen the convergence of significant attention on improving marketing strategies via
the use of GNSS and EO data, including retail location planning, geo-marketing, geo-coding and geo-
analysis for risk management. Space data can be applied to many levels of planning, implementation
and control of activities aimed at achieving market goals and satisfying customer needs.
For instance, Pitney Bowes Business Insight and MB-Research examined how the application of
consumer data, combined with their location, can benefit the retail sector. These services offer big data
related to customers’ purchasing behaviour to optimise retail strategy based on location insights in order
to increase revenue. The increasing availability of location-based insights has allowed more access to
companies to target existing and emerging markets with tailored advertising campaigns.
Nonetheless, these advancements are not without their challenges. Tracking the effectiveness of these
marketing campaigns would not be easy as it would entail various different aspects to be measured.
Meanwhile, the high cost of satellite launches remains a barrier to entry, especially for smaller players.
CONSUMER SOLUTIONS, TOURISM AND HEALTH77EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
The global revenue from EO data and services sales is predicted to grow to over €250 million by
2033 from around €100 m in 2023 with a CAGR of 10%.
Within consumer solutions, geo-advertising retains its top spot, with a projected revenue increase from
€40 million in 2023 to €110 million by 2033 with a CAGR of 10%. Meanwhile, mapping and GIS remains
the second-ranked application with revenue of around €25 million in 2023. This total is expected to
grow to just over €50 million by 2033 (CAGR of 5%). Revenue from geo-tagging is expected to grow
from just over €20 million in 2023 to around €60 million in 2033, eclipsing mapping and GIS (CAGR
of 10%). UV monitoring and air quality monitoring will remain the two smallest applications, with
revenues only growing slightly from 2023 to 2033. The two applications will retain a CAGR of around
5%, projecting the slowest growth within the segment for the next decade. However, this is due to the
applications playing more of an informative role for end-users instead of a commercial one similar to
other applications.
Finally, EO Games revenue is expected to almost triple from around €5 million in 2023 to around
€15 million in 2033 (10% CAGR). Nonetheless, EO games in themselves remain niche relative to in-
game content purchases.
Typically, EO offers a layer of geospatial information contributing to better audience targeting, supporting
map features, or providing specific information on the surrounding area or atmosphere.
How EO and GNSS can make society more inclusive, diverse and equal
According to the World Health Organisation, an estimated 1.3 billion people experience significant
disability. This represents 16% of the world's population or one in six of us. In recent years, new
technological solutions have been developed in order to address better accessibility and inclusion
in society. It has started to become the norm by incorporating, for example, automatic doors,
audiobooks, hand-gesture options and loud text reading, among others. According to the UN,
COVID-19 has accelerated the pace of digital transformation, and with it come opportunities
for more digital inclusion and social protection. EO and GNSS are playing an ever important role in
enabling inclusion, diversity and equality.
Whilst inclusivity, diversity and equality are difficult topics to quantify due to their broad definition
and massive scope, EO and GNSS have the potential to produce meaningful societal impact in that
direction. For example, an initiative from the UN Office for Outer Space Affairs (UNOOSA), “Space for
Persons with Disabilities”, aims at removing barriers for people with disabilities and build an inclusive
and equitable development in the space sector. UNOOSA’s activities entail two focus areas, namely
innovative tools and technologies enabling accessibility and inclusive practices to remove barriers
and enhance the employment processes of persons with disabilities in the space sector. This
includes exploring the role of space technologies in improving accessibility, healthcare and quality
EO growing revenues and the role of space technologies in driving
inclusivity, diversity and equality in the society
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application
of life for persons with disabilities and converting space data to a format that is more accessible for
persons with disabilities through sonification.
Additionally, easy access to smartphones and other mobile devices and the rapid development of mobile
apps that facilitate different users’ needs have given rise to a plenitude of offerings, including those that
can foster the inclusion of people with different disabilities, impairments or mobility issues. Various space
programmes and initiatives may hold an important role in inclusion, diversity and equality, and competition such
as Copernicus and Galileo Masters and myEUspace can foster the development of new apps by supporting
entrepreneurs’ ideas and giving platforms to app developers to fill in such gaps in the mobile app market.
For example, apps such as iAccess Life or Wheelmap can support people with disabilities and mobility
issues by locating wheelchair-accessible places close to shops, restaurants and cafes. Meanwhile, some
science-based apps have been developed to provide safety and support for people with Alzheimer’s
or dementia, including Iridis and Luminosity. Other apps, relying on GNSS functionalities, have been
developed to help people with vision impairment to safely and autonomously navigate the streets, such
as BlindSquare and Lazarillo Accessible GPS. Lastly, some apps have been created to enable people,
unfamiliar with their surroundings, to gain a better understanding of friendly LGBTQ+ spaces, including
to enhance safety and comfort while travelling.
Mapping & GIS Geo-tagging Geo-advertising
Games UV monitoringAir quality monitoring
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application
Mapping & GIS Geo-tagging Geo-advertising
Games UV monitoringAir quality monitoring
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe
North America Asia-Pacific
Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
78CONSUMER SOLUTIONS, TOURISM AND HEALTH
Terminology used on this page is explained in Annex 2 for both GNSS and EO performance parameters.
Current usage of EGNSS
With the rise of 5G, the use of GNSS is becoming increasingly important since it can support
the growing commercialisation of PNT applications. The use of GNSS will enhance mobile
broadband, user capacity, awareness and the use of multiple GNSS rates. Specific to consumer
solutions, 5G will enhance the positioning and navigation functionalities of smartphones.
Galileo-enabled devices will enjoy access to more constellations, becoming more accurate and
reliable. According to useGalileo.eu, over 1,600 smartphone models from around 60 brands are
already Galileo-enabled, including over 360 models from around 25 brands supporting dual-
frequency capabilities.
Galileo differentiators, such as the Galileo High Accuracy Service (HAS) and the Galileo
Authentication feature (OSNMA) are meant to enable the development of such innovative
solutions and/or functions. HAS provides accuracy below a few decimetres, which directly
impacts the performance of a wide range of consumer application categories, such as gaming,
healthcare, robotics, AR and geo-marketing. The use of HAS is more prevalent in professional
and specialised devices, as opposed to regular consumer devices, for the time being.
Focusing on OSNMA, although the specifics of how smartphones will utilise its data
authentication function are still evolving, will add security to mobile payments and enterprise
workforce management and tracking solutions.
Current usage of Galileo and Copernicus in Consumer Solutions,
Tourism and Health
High accuracy
service
Greater
Availability
Higher
Accurancy
More robust
Positioning
Authentication
features
Dual-
frequency
GalileoGalileo
EGNOS
Copernicus Services
Climate Change
(C3S)
Atmosphere
(CAMS)
EUROPEAN SYSTEMS
Current usage of Copernicus
The Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service (CAMS) maps atmospheric and climate
information for air quality and weather analyses and forecasts in Europe and other regions of
the world. CAMS’ products have now made their way to everyday users, by providing real-
time information on weather conditions and atmospheric parameters that can be accessed
via personal devices and wearables, which enables users to make informative decisions, also
concerning their influence on public health matters.
The Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) supports the society by providing authoritative-
and consistent information about the past, present and future climate in Europe and the rest
of the world. Over time, its use has been expanding, as new ways are found to support people
take informative decisions. Platforms such as BioSuccess, a new web-based and mobile tool
that uses C3S to help users make informed decisions regarding biopesticide application, are
meant to ease the access to Copernicus services.
Sentinels
Sentinel-3 Sentinel-5P
CONSUMER SOLUTIONS, TOURISM AND HEALTH79EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
EUSPA continues to support to SMEs and start-ups to develop GNSS
and EO applications for consumer solutions, tourism and health
UV-BODYGUARD
Focused on skin cancer prevention, Ajuma employs satellite data for UV monitoring,
empowering individuals to safeguard their health. Ajuma’s UV-BODYGUARD device measures
incident UV radiation and the device can be easily worn akin to a wristband or attached to,
for example, a backpack or bike handle. From the associated app that is available for Android
or iOS, users can obtain information on current UV intensity, individual UV exposure and
user’s personal UV dosage in real-time, as well as the remaining time they can stay in the sun
without being harmed. To determine the atmospheric influence, Ajuma uses the data from the
Atmosphere Monitoring Service of the European space programme Copernicus. This unique
technology allows the UV-BODYGUARD to calculate the actual UV radiation very reliably and
to the exact second.
Ajuma was one of the winners of the myEUspace competition in 2023.
More information available at: https://ajuma.eu/en
EUSPA supports EU objectives through open-source applications
EUSPA supported the development of open-source mobile apps to ease and enhance the use
of EGNSS differentiators and Copernicus sentinel data and services, to serve multiple domains.
Three open-source Android and iOS applications have been created:
• EGNSS4CAP: deploys EGNSS in the digitalisation procedures for EU farmers to satisfy their
reporting requirements, implementing some features of Galileo
• EGNSS4ALL: goes beyond the CAP (e.g., logistics, urban planning, emergency services,
insurance, etc.), offering robust and authenticated geotagging and mapping
• SEN4ALL: incorporates Copernicus Sentinels 1, 2 and 5 and CORINE land cover service
offering easily accessible information on land, water and air monitoring.
More information available at: http://egnss4cap.eu
Murmuration
Murmuration aims to monitor the environmental impact of tourism by utilising satellite
data, paving the way for sustainable practices in the industry. It prioritises the environmental
dimension in every decision by utilising satellite EO data on a global scale. This data is then
merged with other sources, such as statistical data, in-situ measurements and geolocated
databases to offer precise and transparent information on the environmental state and tourism
pressure at any location on the planet. The service comes equipped with a catalogue of around
20 environmental indicators covering five crucial environmental themes, namely air, water,
biodiversity, soil and climate.
Murmuration creates environmental monitoring dashboards for decision-makers and local
authorities to aid in their decision-making process and improve their consideration of their
territories' environmental conditions.
Murmuration was one of the winners of the myEUspace competition in 2023.
More information available at: https://murmuration-sas.com/en/homepage
WeCENT - Weather, Climate and Environmental information for Tourism
The WeCENT (Weather, Climate and ENvironmental information for Tourism) project was
funded by the EU under the Horizon 2020 grant framework. The project aims to bring some of
the latest scientific information on climate and environment closer to the general public to
be used for day-to-day activities, by tailoring this information for direct and easy use for tourists,
adapted for four different touristic destinations types (i.e. beach, mountain, rural, urban areas)
and seasons.
The platform, which makes use of a variety of tourism-customised information, adapted
for urban, rural, mountain and beach destinations in Italy and Romania, is based on climate
reanalysis, satellite-based products, analysis and forecast products. The project will measure
user interest in environmental particularities, and will select and determine relevant climate and
environmental information based on site, season and leisure activities, as well as translate EO
data into user-friendly information delivered to the user in a compact and timely form. The
results of the project will provide innovative information to tourism actors and open new spaces
for innovative applications based on satellite data.
More information available at: https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/887544
EUROPEAN PROJECTS
80CONSUMER SOLUTIONS, TOURISM AND HEALTH
REFERENCE CHARTS
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
Revenue from GNSS device sales and services by region Revenue from GNSS device sales and services by type
Installed base of GNSS devices by type
0
1
2
3
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
TabletsDigital camerasPortable computers
Sport & Wearables Personal tracking devices Consumer Robotics
Low-Power Asset Tracking Devices Smartphones
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (billions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (billions)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
25
50
75
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Smartphones Portable computers Digital cameras
Tablets Sport & Wearables Personal tracking devices
Consumer Robotics Low-Power Asset Tracking Devices Data revenue (smartphones and tablets)**
GNSS-enabled revenues enabled by apps†
**: Only data revenue arising from the use of GNSS-based services considered;
†: Pay-to-download, In-app-purchases and ad revenue from health & lifestyle, navigation & trackings, tourism, and corporate apps
6
8
Units (billions)
Installed base of GNSS devices by type
120
270
420
€ (billions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by type
0
1
2
3
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
TabletsDigital camerasPortable computers
Sport & Wearables Personal tracking devices Consumer Robotics
Low-Power Asset Tracking Devices Smartphones
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (billions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (billions)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
25
50
75
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Smartphones Portable computers Digital cameras
Tablets Sport & Wearables Personal tracking devices
Consumer Robotics Low-Power Asset Tracking Devices Data revenue (smartphones and tablets)**
GNSS-enabled revenues enabled by apps†
**: Only data revenue arising from the use of GNSS-based services considered;
†: Pay-to-download, In-app-purchases and ad revenue from health & lifestyle, navigation & trackings, tourism, and corporate apps
6
8
Units (billions)
Installed base of GNSS devices by type
120
270
420
€ (billions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by type
0
1
2
3
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
TabletsDigital camerasPortable computers
Sport & Wearables Personal tracking devices Consumer Robotics
Low-Power Asset Tracking Devices Smartphones
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (billions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (billions)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
25
50
75
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Smartphones Portable computers Digital cameras
Tablets Sport & Wearables Personal tracking devices
Consumer Robotics Low-Power Asset Tracking Devices Data revenue (smartphones and tablets)**
GNSS-enabled revenues enabled by apps†
**: Only data revenue arising from the use of GNSS-based services considered;
†: Pay-to-download, In-app-purchases and ad revenue from health & lifestyle, navigation & trackings, tourism, and corporate apps
6
8
Units (billions)
Installed base of GNSS devices by type
120
270
420
€ (billions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by type
0
1
2
3
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
TabletsDigital camerasPortable computers
Sport & Wearables Personal tracking devices Consumer Robotics
Low-Power Asset Tracking Devices Smartphones
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (billions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (billions)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
25
50
75
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Smartphones Portable computers Digital cameras
Tablets Sport & Wearables Personal tracking devices
Consumer Robotics Low-Power Asset Tracking Devices Data revenue (smartphones and tablets)**
GNSS-enabled revenues enabled by apps†
**: Only data revenue arising from the use of GNSS-based services considered;
†: Pay-to-download, In-app-purchases and ad revenue from health & lifestyle, navigation & trackings, tourism, and corporate apps
6
8
Units (billions)
Installed base of GNSS devices by type
120
270
420
€ (billions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by type
CONSUMER SOLUTIONS, TOURISM AND HEALTH81EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
REFERENCE CHARTS
Revenue from EO data sales by application
Revenue from EO services sales by application
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
Mapping & GIS Geo-tagging Geo-advertising
Games UV monitoringAir quality monitoring
€ (millions)
0
50
100
150
200
250
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
Mapping & GIS Geo-tagging Geo-advertising
Games UV monitoringAir quality monitoring
€ (millions)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
Mapping & GIS Geo-tagging Geo-advertising
Games UV monitoringAir quality monitoring
€ (millions)
0
50
100
150
200
250
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
Mapping & GIS Geo-tagging Geo-advertising
Games UV monitoringAir quality monitoring
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
Revenue from EO data sales by region
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
0
50
100
150
200
250
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
0
50
100
150
200
250
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
AND HUMANITARIAN AID
82
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND HUMANITARIAN AID
The synergetic EMAid segment, which sees a balanced use of both EO and GNSS technologies, is
composed of two sub-segments: emergency management, which encompasses the organisation,
planning and application of emergency management measures to prepare for, respond to and recover
from disasters; and humanitarian aid, which consists of delivering life-saving assistance to those in
need, without any adverse distinction.
The domain of EMAid, often seen as a market by and for public entities, relies on an array of commercial
players for the provision of services, applications and devices. These support actors both on the field and
behind their desk at coordination centres across the world. Actors within this segment include national
governments, international organisations, NGOs, dedicated agencies and private companies.
EO plays an important role, providing key information for emergency management in each of the four
stages of EMAid: prevention/mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery. EO also provides data
for SAR operations, as part of an emergency response phase, and post-event recovery analysis via
the comparison of recent and archival damage assessment from EO data. EO provides comprehensive
information over vast, remote and volatile areas, offering reliable and frequently updated documentation,
assessments, and real-time monitoring of humanitarian situations.
GNSS provides humanitarian aid operators with precise geolocation information, enabling efficient logistics
planning, asset management, and navigation in remote or disaster-stricken areas, thereby enhancing the
effectiveness of emergency response efforts. GNSS-enabled geolocation is fundamental when responding
to emergency situations caused by droughts, earthquakes, floods, and other natural disasters.
Cross-reference: GNSS-enabled search and rescue beacons are presented and quantified in this market
segment. However, these beacons are used by different users across maritime and inland waterways,
fisheries and aquaculture, manned aviation as well as on land (e.g. consumer solutions).
What you can read in this chapter
• Key trends: EO and GNSS are supporting increasing demand for humanitarian and emergency response
efforts.
• User perspective: User-centred design brings tangible benefits to those in need of assistance.
• Industry: Emergency management and humanitarian aid value chains.
• Recent developments: Multifaceted satellite data improves response to disasters and humanitarian
assistance – Preparedness, prevention and mitigation lead the EO data and service market.
• Future market evolution: The role of EO in crisis management and assistance mobilisation is absolute.
• European systems and projects: EGNSS and Copernicus are adaptable and ever-evolving.
• Reference charts: Yearly evolution of installed base of GNSS devices and revenues as well as EO
revenues by application and region in the EMAid sector.
© iStock
Application descriptions can be found in Annex 3.1 Incl. Emergency Position Indicating Radio Beacon
(EPIRB), PLB, Automatic Identification System Search
And Rescue Transponder (AIS-SART) and Automatic
Identification System Man Overboard Beacon (AIS-MOB)
2 Incl. Emergency locator transmitter (ELT), Emergency
locator transmitter Distress Tracking (ELT-DT) and
Personal Locator Beacons (PLBs)
3 Incl. PLBs
4 Incl. Telematics for vehicles and assetsPost-event recovery
• Post-crisis damage assessment
and building inspection
• Restoration of supply chain and
infrastructure servicesHumanitarian aid
• Health and medicine response and
coordination (incl. Anticipatory
humanitarian action)
• Management of refugee camps
• Population displacement monitoring
• NGO’s asset management4
• Welcome applications to people
in need of humanitarian aidSearch and Rescue
• SAR operations: at sea1
• SAR operations: aviation2
• SAR operations: land3
• Situational awareness supporting SARPrevention and mitigation
• Impact exposure analysis and proactive
mitigation measuresResponse
• Crisis area assessment
• Operational wildfires modellingPreparedness
• Early warning emergency applications
• Hazards monitoringLegend
EO application
GNSS application
Synergetic application
(combined use of EO and GNSS)
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND HUMANITARIAN AID83EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
KEY TRENDS
Prevention and mitigation is an integral part of the emergency management cycle
The risk mitigation and prevention phase is focused on minimising the effects of disasters by identifying
and evaluating potential risks (differently in urban/rural areas). The EU Disaster Risk Management
policy developments focus on the prevention and reduction of disaster risks, tackling them through
preventive, preparedness, response and recovery actions.
The Disaster Risk Reduction Working Group established under the coordination of Group on Earth
Observations (GEO) is developing and implementing a clear and crosscutting approach to advance the
use of EO in Disaster Risk Reduction efforts, both at the national and local level. GNSS can support
monitoring and early warning systems for natural disasters such as landslides, earthquakes and
tsunamis, providing critical information for preparedness and mitigation. GNSS is essential in a variety of
applications related to disaster management, enabling precise emergency response, recovery activities,
and logistics operations.
The European Commission Disaster Risk Management Knowledge Centre (EC DRMKC) integrates
existing scientific multi-disciplinary knowledge and co-develops innovative solutions for existing needs.
Activities of the EC DRMKC support the translation of complex scientific data and analyses into usable
information and provides science-based advice for DRM policies.
An integrated approach is crucial to save lives, dispense emergency assistance and provide disaster relief
In recognition that disaster preparedness plays an important role in building the resilience of communities, the EU is aiming to mainstream preparedness and risk reduction measures across all its humanitarian
programming. The approach to disaster preparedness and risk-informed humanitarian response promotes multi-hazard preparedness and anticipatory action as a means for a quicker and more effective response.
To support this work, the EU’s Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations department published a new Disaster Preparedness Guidance Note in 2021, which explains its approach to disaster preparedness.
Disaster management is an area where the use of satellite data can make a difference and even save lives, and the Copernicus Emergency Management Service (CEMS) is a major tool supporting disaster
preparedness and management. It is free of charge and available for emergency actors anywhere in the world. The service supports crisis managers, civil protection authorities and humanitarian aid actors dealing
with natural disasters, manmade emergency situations, and humanitarian crises, as well as those involved in disaster risk reduction and recovery activities. CEMS consists of five
main components: risk & recovery mapping; rapid mapping; early warning & monitoring systems for forest fires (European and global); early warning & monitoring systems for
floods (European and global); and the European Drought Observatory (EDO). CEMS provides all actors involved in the management of natural disasters, manmade emergency
situations, and humanitarian crises with timely and accurate geospatial information derived from satellite remote sensing and completed by available in situ or open data sources.
It has become the main space-enabled support services for a variety of emergencies, A total of 86 activations of the rapid mapping service were carried out in 2022 alone.
In this context, the Emergency Response Coordination Centre (ERCC) is the heart of EU Civil protection mechanism, acting as a deployment hub for all EU Member States,
participating states, the affected country and civil protection and humanitarian experts. The centre coordinates the delivery of assistance to disaster-stricken countries and fulfils
a pivotal role in coordination emergencies inside and outside the EU, enhancing integrated and coordinated actions.
Satellite technology offer crucial support to cope with the challenging
geopolitical context
The UN recognises the important role that Earth Observation and geolocation (provided by
GNSS) plays in supporting sustainable development, including humanitarian aid operations. EO can
provide information over large, remote and unstable areas, providing reliable and frequently updatable
documentation, assessments and monitoring in near real-time of the evolution of humanitarian situations.
GNSS positioning is used during emergencies and disasters to optimise efficient and effective responses
to emergency situations, as well as to support logistics operations.
Given the growing risks in the EU's vicinity, humanitarian aid and diplomatic efforts to resolve conflicts
are more crucial than ever. The 2023 humanitarian budget is around €1.8 billion, with a focus on Ukraine
and regions in the Middle East and Africa. Thematic Copernicus Emergency Management Service-based
workshops help aid workers harness Copernicus tools effectively. Space data tailored to the needs of the
humanitarian community aids logistics, asset management, and refugee camp planning and monitoring.
In this context, EUSpace4Ukraine is an initiative through which EUSPA is connecting the EU space
innovation community with NGOs offering humanitarian aid to provide technological solutions enhancing
humanitarian support for the Ukrainian people. You can read more about this programme on page 87.
EO and GNSS are supporting increasing demand for humanitarian
and emergency response efforts
Key market trends
• The holistic use of EO and GNSS data to the four stages of emergency management (prevention and mitigation, preparedness, response, and post-event recovery) has been observed, driven by the
expanding use of satellite-derived EO and GNSS geospatial information, which support continual planning and action cycles when needed
• Data is helping actors active in humanitarian aid make better informed decisions and logistic planning, customising the most effective way to allocate resources to the specificities of the emergency,
location and priorities
• The Galileo SAR beacon market is expected to grow significantly in the coming years, with the installed base of GNSS-enabled SAR beacons expected to double by 2029 (see page 88)
© ESA
84EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND HUMANITARIAN AID
USER PERSPECTIVE
User-centred design brings tangible benefits to those in need of assistance
Data for humanitarian needs is widely available but more awareness, training and know-how are needed
A key trend in the humanitarian aid sector is the adoption of new technologies
and services. The integration of these new technologies into pre-existing
systems can be complex, but their advancement and implementation can
help improve decision-making processes. NGOs are already using GNSS
in addition to EO for asset management. The leveraging of EO data into
solutions can offer significant solutions to users, such as:
• Detecting changes during armed conflict, including the destruction of urban/
suburban environments, population displacement and camp monitoring;
• Leveraging a full-time series of satellite data for long-term analysis. The
Copernicus programme delivers analogous datasets and time series,
ensuring that trends and changes are monitored over time.
However, broadly speaking, users of EO data in the humanitarian aid sector
still encounter several challenges and difficulties when using these data.
First and foremost, it is often the case that NGOs and humanitarian actors are
working with limited and/or strict budgets. This affects the ability to acquire
EO data and services which can be expensive, especially considering the
many data factors needed for applications in this sector. A way to overcome
these constraints could be for EO service providers to offer tailor-made,
budget-friendly services or to price these services at discounted rates for
enterprises in the sector.
Furthermore, EO data and products can be technologically too complex
for users not accustomed to data processing or such data formats. The
biggest challenge is the lack of technical expertise, namely the difficulty in
accessing and processing the raw data into usable information, and then
communicating that information effectively to diverse stakeholders. What
the sector needs is easy-to-use data and systems, delivered quickly at a low
cost. This was confirmed during the 2022 User Consultation Platform (see
below), where users identified the need for easily manipulable datasets with
robust and frequently updated (at least daily) data.
Apart from tailor-made solutions by service providers, humanitarian aid
organisations may need technical training in remote sensing techniques and
data processing, management and analysis to effectively use Copernicus EO
data, in addition to training for specific applications involving EO data, such as
disaster response or food security monitoring. This can assist humanitarian aid
workers to better understand how to use Copernicus EO data to support their
work. Thematic Copernicus EMS-based workshops can also help in this matter.
Sources of key EO and GNSS user requirements
The key EO and GNSS user requirements for the different application groups within the emergency management and
humanitarian aid segment are collected using a harmonised procedure at EU level.
Information is collected through extensive interactions with user groups, providers and experts in a continuous process
culminating at the User Consultation Platforms (UCP). All relevant requirements are documented in detail and updated regularly
within the Report on Emergency Management and Humanitarian Aid user needs and requirements. User requirements for
Earth Observation (EO) services and products – as well as their evolution – are now also collected through the UCP. The
process covers the EO user needs and requirements of commercial users based on inputs from industry experts and user
groups, mirroring the existing process implemented for GNSS.
Moreover, the collection of specific requirements for Copernicus services and products is supported by an integrated
process that involves different channels: (i) dedicated studies (e.g. "NEXTSPACE" project, "Copernicus for EC (C4EC)" study,
Commission Staff Working Document on user needs); (ii) targeted consultations organised by the European Commission or
the entrusted entities with the relevant communities; and (iii) regular and structured exchanges among representatives of the
Copernicus governance structure and Member States through the Copernicus User Forum.
Delineation monitoring of a fire in Tenerife, Spain. Copernicus
Emergency Management Service (© 2023 European Union),
EMSR685
Delineation monitoring of flooding in Emilia-Romagna, Italy.
Copernicus EMS mapping service (© 2023 European Union),
EMSN154
Detail of landslide risk assessment for Olympia archaeological
site. Copernicus Emergency Management Service (© 2022
European Union), EMSN128
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND HUMANITARIAN AID85EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
Emergency Management and Humanitarian Aid Value Chains1
USERS OF POSITIONING
INFORMATION
SEARCH AND RESCUE
BEACON USERS
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in GNSS and EO
downstream activities. Please note that enterprises listed in the data providers step of the value
chain often provide platforms as a service. For the sake of simplicity the data providers are not
repeated in other stages of the value chain in which they are active.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 13 and 23 for a comprehensive description of value chains and how to
interpret them at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the
company, though the actual area of activity might be wider.
END USERS
INFORMATION
PROVIDERS
EO PRODUCTS
AND SERVICE
PROVIDERS
PLATFORM
PROVIDERS
INFRASTRUCTURE
PROVIDERS
• AIRBUS*
• BLACKSKY
• CAPELLA SPACE
• GEOSAT*
• E-GEOS*
• ICEYE*
• MAXAR
• PLANET
• UMBRA
• ACK
TECHNOLOGIES
• ACR ELECTRONICS
• AEROMARINE SRT
• ASTRONICS
CORPORATION
• BABCOCK MISSION
CRITICAL*
• BLUE SKY
NETWORK
• COMNAV
TECHNOLOGY*
• CORE
CORPORATION
• CYBERNETICA*
• GME
• HEICO
• HR SMITH*
• INTELLIAN
TECHNOLOGIES
• NEW SUNRISE CO.
• OHB*
• SAFRAN*
• SYRLINKS*
• SEPTENTRIO*
• TECHTEST
LIMITED*
• U-BLOX*
• AWS
• CLOUDFERRO*
• GOOGLE CLOUD
PLATFORM
• IBM CLOUD
• MICROSOFT AZURE
• T-SYSTEMS*
EPIRB & PLB
ACR ELECTRONICS, COBHAM*, FURUNO
ELECTRIC, H R SMITH*,JAPAN RADIO CO, JOTRON
AS*, OCEAN SIGNAL*, SAFRAN*, SYRLINKS*,
TECHTEST*, WÄRTSILÄ*
AIS-SART & AIS-MOB
ACR ELECTRONICS, COBHAM*, FURUNO
ELECTRIC, JOTRON AS*, KONGSBERG MARITIME*,
OCEAN SIGNAL*, SAFRAN*, WÄRTSILÄ*
ELT
ACR ELECTRONICS, ASTRONICS CORPORATION,
ECA GROUP, H R SMITH*, OROLIA*, SAMYUNG
ENC, SYRLINKS*, TECHTEST*
• CLOUDEO*
• CREODIAS*
• EARTH-I
• EDS CEODE
• EURODATACUBE*
• GOOGLE EARTH ENGINE
• NORTH.IO*
• OPEN DATA CUBE
• OPENEO*
• PLANET EXPLORER
• SENTINEL-HUB*
(SINERGISE)
• SPATIAL SERVICES*
• UP42*
• AIRPLANES AND
HELICOPTERS PILOTS
• HIKERS
• FISHING BOAT
OPERATORS
• MOUNTAINEERS
• OFF-SHORE OPERATORS
• RECREATIONAL
BOATERS
• SHIP OPERATORS
• SOLE MARINERS
• 4EARTHINTELLIGENCE*
• CONSTELLR*
• DEIMOS*
• DEWBERRY
• DHI GRAS*
• GAF*
• GEOVILLE*
• HR WALLINGFORD*
• INDRA SISTEMAS*
• KSAT*
• ORORATECH*
• PIESAT*
• SERCO*
• SKYGEO
• TRE ALTAMIRA (CLS
GROUP)*
• VERISK ANALYTICS
EMAid CROSS CUTTING:
• E-GEOS*
• EO4GEO*
EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT SERVICES:
• ORBITAL INSIGHTS*
HUMANITARIAN AID
SERVICES:
• GEOHUM*
• CIVIL PROTECTIONS,
SMALL PUBLIC SPACE
AGENCIES
• NATIONAL
GOVERNMENTS
• NGOS (UNHCR, RED
CROSS, MEDICINS SANS
FRONTIERES (MSF))
• REGIONAL AUTHORITIES
SEARCH AND RESCUE RESPONSE
• COAST GUARDS
• COSPAS-SARSAT
• DISASTER MANAGEMENT TEAMS
• JOINT COORDINATION CENTRES
EARTH
OBSERVATION
SAR BEACON MANUFACTURERS
COMPONENT
AND RECEIVER
MANUFACTURERS
GNSS
• COPERNICUS
SENTINELS*
• COSMO-SKYMED (ASI)*
• DMC*
• LANDSAT (USGS)
• METEOSAT (EUMETSAT)*
• RADARSAT (CSA)
• RELEVANT IN-SITU
NETWORKS
• RELEVANT NATIONAL
MISSIONS
• FEDERATED
INFRASTRUCTURE
(E.G. GAIA-X)*
• SENTINEL
COLLABORATIVE
GROUND SEGMENT*
• GEOHAZARDS
HYDROLOGY TEP*
• COPERNICUS DATASPACE
ECOSYSTEM*
• NOAA ONESTOP (NOAA)
• CODE-DE*
• WEKEO*
• COPERNICUS CLIMATE
CHANGE SERVICE (C3S)*
• COPERNICUS EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT SERVICE
(CEMS)*
• COPERNICUS SECURITY
SERVICE (CSS)*
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
European2 GNSS and EO
industry in the global arena
Europe held several top positions
among GNSS Component and Re-
ceiver manufacturers for the Emer-
gency management and humanitar-
ian aid sector in 2021. U-blox held
second place after ACR Electronics.
Overall, European companies and
North American manufacturers hold
90% of the market.
In EO, the market is mainly divid-
ed between North America and
Asia, which have a combined share
of 65%. In comparison, European
companies retain almost 35% of the
market, led by companies such as
e-GEOS (Leonardo), Deimos, and In-
dra Sistemas.
INDUSTRY
DATA PROVIDERS
86EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND HUMANITARIAN AID
0
50
100
150
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
PLB EPIRB AIS-MOB AIS-SART ELT Telematics for humanitarian aid
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by type
PLB EPIRB AIS-MOB AIS-SART ELT Telematics for humanitarian aid
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
With over 150 000 units in 2022, Emergency Position Indicating Radio Beacons (EPIRBs) are by far
the largest group of GNSS-enabled search and rescue beacons being sold each year. Personal Locator
Beacons are the second-largest category, reaching over 110 000 units, ahead of AIS-MOB (Man Over
Board), which grew the fastest, registering a CAGR of 28% over the period 2012-2022.
Emergency Locator Transmitter (ELT), although only forming a small portion of the market, is still
growing steadily over the years. The same goes for Telematics for humanitarian aid, for which a
significant rise was observed in 2021, before returning to its previous growth rate in 2022.
The pronounced rise in 2018 and fall in 2019 reflect the overestimation by manufacturers of the size of
the market and subsequent adjustments to the supply chain. Another significant shipment rise in 2021
is attributed to the rebound after the COVID-19 pandemic and the increasing functionalities of GNSS in
handling crisis situations.
The expected future growth in the shipments GNSS devices for emergency management and
humanitarian aid is reflected also in the evolution of the installed base (see reference charts on page 90).
Multifaceted satellite data improves response to disasters
and humanitarian assistance
Galileo Emergency Warning Satellite Service providing
free and accessible early warning systems
Galileo’s Return Link Services paving the way for greater EGNSS adoption as well as the
introduction of Remote Beacon Activation to support the search and rescue of aircraft and vessels
suspected of being in distressAccording to Regulation 2021/696, in the near future, Galileo, the
European GNSS, is set to contribute to early warning systems through
a new service named the ‘Galileo Emergency Warning Satellite
Service’ (EWSS). Offered at no cost to users, this satellite service will
communicate warning messages to populations facing the threat of
natural disasters or other emergencies in affected regions. The service
can be accessed on any Galileo-enabled devices that can receive,
decipher and display these messages.
The EWSS will span global coverage and will be complementary
to the public warning system. This public warning system has been
implemented across mobile networks since June 2022, in line with the
Directive (EU) 2018/1972 which established the European Electronic
Communications Code.
The service is free of charge for users and will broadcast warnings
on natural disasters and other emergencies in close cooperation
with Member States’ national civil protection authorities. Galileo’s
messaging function transmits an alert to Galileo-enabled devices
with instructions to follow depending on the area in which the user
is located.
Galileo supports SAR Rescue operations with the introduction of its unique feature: the Return Link Service (RLS), which has
been operational since 2021. This feature complements Galileo Forward Link Service which has been in operation since 2016.
Whereas the Forward Link Service relays distress signals from emergency beacons to the ground segment or the response
centre, the RLS acknowledges and confirms the receipt of the signals to the emergency beacon users. The return and forward
link is graphically represented on the illustration below.
Currently, Galileo RLS-enabled emergency beacons for
personal use, maritime and aviation (PLBs, EPIRBs and
ELTs) are already available on the market.
Moreover, RLS will enable the additional service of Galileo
Remote SAR Beacon Activation (RBA), for which the
beacons would constantly read the return link signals.
Consequently, the Galileo ground segment would be able
to remotely activate a specific beacon in the event the
vessel or aircraft is suspected to be in an emergency (e.g.
no communication received, concerns raised by owner/
operator, etc.). This activation would thereby aid the rescue
operators or allow for the subsequent de-activation in
case it is confirmed that there is no real emergency.
Shipments of GNSS devices by type
© EUSPA
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND HUMANITARIAN AID87EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
The EO market for data and services concerning emergency management and humanitarian aid was
valued at nearly a quarter of a billion euros in 2022. The market has grown by an expected CAGR of
7% since 2020.
Prevention and mitigation are the largest category with 35% of the market share; the segment has
grown the most since 2020. Preparedness is second with 20%, followed closely by post-event recovery
and response. This growth reflects the increased attention that citizens and public organisations devote
to emergency prevention and preparedness, which is not surprising considering the growing frequency
of natural and man-made emergencies.
Humanitarian aid constitutes 10% of the market, while the smallest market share is attributed to the
application of situational awareness supporting search and rescue, which has been re-segmented in this
year's iteration of the report. The market for this application is expected to double by 2032 as the service
is already well-developed and it will continue to grow over the coming years.
Mobilising the EU Space innovation community to enhance humanitarian
support in Ukraine
The EUSpace4Ukraine initiative, initiated by the EU Agency for the Space Programme (EUSPA),
focuses on satellite data applications to support civilian/humanitarian efforts in Ukraine.
Through this initiative, EUSPA connects EO and navigation app developers with NGOs, volunteers
and personnel in Ukraine, allowing them to utilise satellite data for humanitarian purposes.
The EUSpace4Ukraine demonstration was held in Poland with a focus on the Copernicus
enhanced map application and Galileo-enabled drones for search and rescue operations. The
mapping application provides up-to-date, accurate Copernicus imagery which is used to support
humanitarian aid workers in navigating a challenging terrain faster and supports mission planning
more efficiently considering the impacts on the terrain. The drones, on the other hand, are
equipped with thermal cameras and optical zoom which support the assessment of the structural
integrity of damaged buildings and facilitate the search
for people in remote locations.
Both applications were then used and tested by
the Ukrainian Red Cross in a simulated emergency
environment near Lublin and will undergo further testing
in actual fieldwork in the weeks and months following
the demonstrator.
More information available at:
https://www.euspa.europa.eu/euspace4Ukraine
The Copernicus Emergency Management Service (CEMS) 10-year anniversary
CEMS celebrated a decade of operation in June 2022 as a world leader in
emergency mapping, early warning, and monitoring. CEMS has provided a
truly global service as the world's only fully operational emergency mapping
service at no cost to users and with open access data for the past 10 years,
with most components of CEMS operating 24/7/365. CEMS is constantly
evolving and integrating the latest developments in science and technology to
improve its services. CEMS components include:
• On-demand mapping, offering on-demand detailed information for selected emergency
situations that arise from natural or man-made disasters anywhere in the world. This include
Rapid Mapping, able to provide geospatial information within hours or days, and Risk and
Recovery Mapping, which supports disaster management activities.
• Exposure mapping providing highly accurate and continuously updated information on the
presence of human settlements and population with the Global Human Settlement Layer
(GHSL). This component include Population grids, able to quantify the amount of population
exposed to hazard, and Built-up surface grids providing information on human settlements.
• Early Warning & Monitoring offers critical geospatial information at European and global level
through continuous observations and forecasts for floods, droughts and forest fires.
For more information, please visit the CEMS website
Preparedness, prevention and mitigation lead the EO data and service market
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application in 2022
6 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Situational awareness supporting search and rescue
Response
Preparedness
0
50
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
20%
35%
16%
18%
10%
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application 2022
Preparedness
Prevention and mitigation
Response
Post-event recovery
Situational awareness
supporting search and
rescue
Humanitarian aid
€ 223 million
1%
© EUSPA
88EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND HUMANITARIAN AID
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
Revolutionising wildfire detection with thermal imagery technology
Wildfires occur at greater frequencies than they have in past decades. Fire prevention and
swift detection immediately after a fire ignites are vital elements in firefighting efforts. Presently,
in densely populated regions, human observations, often through smoke or aerial surveys, are
the primary means of detecting fires. In remote areas, satellites, including weather satellites like
GOES or moderate-resolution imagery like NPP-VIIRS, as well as Sentinel-2 SWIR bands can be
utilised for fire detection.
Munich-based OroraTech, a major player in the global earth observation industry, will launch
a break-through on-orbit fire processing technology that is able, in merely 3 minutes, to detect
and send fire notification alarms to customers via the multi-
satellite link once the satellite has passed the affected
area. The new on-orbit detection with the unique satellite
constellation will be launched in 2024.
Constellr is another company that provides wildfire
solutions with land surface temperature monitoring, using
a combination of publicly available data and Constellr
proprietary data.
These are just two examples of enterprises that utilise space
data to provide solutions for natural disasters.
Understanding emergency and risk as an all-encompassing system
with multiple synergies
Earth Observation data and geolocation provided by GNSS play a crucial role in achieving the
United Nations’ 2030 Agenda for sustainable development (see page 24). The United Nations’
Office for Outer Space and EUSPA wrote a collaborative report highlighting the positive impact
EGNSS and Copernicus applications have on fulfilling sustainable development goals. There are
17 main sustainable development goals, 13 of which benefit significantly from EGNSS and
Copernicus. The study also emphasises the potential of EGNSS-EO convergence to stimulate
innovation and increase the use of space technology.
GNSS ensures accurate positioning globally at any time, while Earth Observation (EO) supplies
data on the Earth's surface, atmosphere and marine systems. This research distinctly illustrates
that the collaborative utilisation of both systems unlocks numerous synergies with a significant
influence on sustainable development.
Illustrating the integration of GNSS and EO, the EUSPA H2020 project “GEO VISION” delivered
global visual situational awareness, facilitating "observation to action" within a minute. It is
specifically designed for applications such as humanitarian crisis management. Notably, products
and applications from the project are actively employed by the United Nations, such as
mapping earthquake impacts in Nepal to enhance Search and Rescue (SAR) operation efficiency.
The chart shows that from 2023 to 2033, shipments of emergency management and humanitarian
aid GNSS devices will grow consistently, indicating an increasing emphasis on safety measures.
The largest share of the market is taken by EPIRB units, growing from around 170 000 units in 2023
to just over 300 000 by 2033. This is followed by PLB and AIS-MOB, growing to more than 300 000
and 100 000 units respectively by 2033 – more than double the current shipments number for PLB over
a period of 10 years. The ELT category will also grow, although with a lower CAGR.
Both PLBs and EPIRBs contributed to around 40% of the global installed base in 2023 (see reference
charts on page 90), and EPIRBs are projected to lead the market from 2023 onwards, taking over from
PLBs’ market dominance in the past decade. The installed base of AIS-MOBs, which are quite popular
among recreational boaters and crews of smaller vessels, has reached around 10% of the market.
The role of GNSS and EO in crisis management and assistance mobilisation
is absolute
Shipments of GNSS devices by type
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by type
PLB EPIRB AIS-MOB AIS-SART ELT Telematics for humanitarian aid
2033
aribbean
2033
ribbean
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by type
PLB EPIRB AIS-MOB AIS-SART ELT Telematics for humanitarian aid
© Copernicus Climate Change Service
European State of the Climate | 2022
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND HUMANITARIAN AID89EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
EUROPEAN SYSTEMS AND PROJECTS
EGNSS and Copernicus are adaptable and ever-evolving
Current usage of EGNSS
The Galileo Return Link Service (RLS) is a worldwide service
provided at no cost to COSPAS-SARSAT RLS compatible
beacons.
Exclusive to Galileo, this innovative feature establishes a
communication link that transmits Return Link Messages
(RLM) back to the beacon's source, notifying the user that the
alert has been identified and localised.
The introduction of RLS underscores Europe's leadership
in cutting-edge technological solutions for emergency
management operations.
Copernicus Usage for Emergency Management
and Humanitarian Aid
Copernicus plays an important role in emergency management,
providing key information at each of the four stages: prevention,
preparedness, response and recovery activities for different
natural and man-made disasters and other humanitarian crises.
The Copernicus Emergency Management Service (CEMS)
provides data about the effects of impact exposure such as
assets and population density. Concerning prevention and
preparedness, CEMS is used, including through the risk and
recovery mapping, to support monitoring activities and risk
assessments, as well as preparedness studies for resilience of
specific areas, e.g. to rain events.
Supported also by other Copernicus services (e.g. C3S
provides continuous observations and forecasts relevant for
many types of disasters), many CEMS components are used
to prevent or cope with emergencies, including the rapid
mapping component, in search and rescue activities, as part
of an emergency response phase, supporting situational
awareness. Finally, during the post-event recovery analysis
stage, the comparison of recent and archival EO data supports
damage assessment.
Humanitarian aid actions are transversal and tend to cover
the whole cycle; in this regard, Copernicus can help monitor
displacement of refugees and internally displaced persons,
among other uses such as population counting.
OVERWATCH – Integrated holographic map for disaster events
EO data is a key element for hazard impact evaluation and recovery planning in
case of large-scale disaster events. Combined with low-height drones, it allows to
obtain for high-accuracy terrain mapping.
OVERWATCH designs and develops a holographic management map for emergency
management for wildfires and floods. The developed platform covers the lifecycle
of data management starting with data ingestion, and followed by harmonisation,
standardisation, and data processing. The data is then transformed into exploitable
information supporting emergency/crisis management for floods and wildfires.
The project is also developing a new set of machine-learning algorithms to map floods, fires,
and damaged area, using Copernicus Sentinel and drone data. In particular, for Sentinel-2,
super-resolution techniques will be trained on the 10m visible and NIR bands and the 20m
red edge, SWIR bands to enhance the spatial resolution of the source data by up to 4 times
(5m). The AR/VR-enabled holographic map provides the user (person in charge of crisis
management and response) with an intuitive and visually appealing interface.
More information available at: https://overwatchproject.eu/en/
AWARE: enAabling EWS/GAlileo maRket uptake in widEspread PWS
Solutions
The European Commission is expected to launch the Galileo Emergency Warning
satellite service (EWSS) in the near future. EWSS is a worldwide service to broadcast
emergency warnings linked to natural or manmade disasters, with the major
advantage of remaining operational when all terrestrial communication networks are
down, and in places where they do not exist at all.
Final recipients of EWSS messages are primarily citizens equipped with Galileo-
enabled smartphones, although another category of end-users exists: the Public
Warning Systems (PWS) stakeholders. For these, specific GNSS equipment is needed
to receive and process the EWSS messages. The equipment must be integrated intofixed
devices which alert citizens via audio, video and text alert messages (such as Long-Range
Acoustic Devices or Digital Panels) or adequate digital messages flows within IT systems.
The purpose of the AWARE project is to develop this specific GNSS equipment, also
benefitting from the OSNMA feature. AWARE will also enhance the adoption of EWSS
by European civil protection authorities by performing activities to support the EUSPA
and the EC for the service.
More information is available at: https://www.euspa.europa.eu/enabling-ewsgalileo-
market-uptake-widespread-pws-solutions#tab-details
Sentinels
Copernicus Services
Emergency
(CEMS)
Land
(CLMS)
Search and
Rescue service
SAR Return
Link
SAR Forward
Link
Higher
Accuracy
Greater
Availability
MEOSAR
contribution
Dual-
frequency
GalileoGalileo
EGNOS
Climate Change
(C3S)
Horizon Europe,
a programme of the
European Union
Horizon Europe,
a programme of the
European Union
Terminology used on this page is explained in Annex 2 for both GNSS and EO performance parameters.
Sentinel-5P
Sentinel-2Sentinel-1
90EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND HUMANITARIAN AID
REFERENCE CHARTS
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
Revenue from GNSS device sales by region Revenue from GNSS device sales by application
Installed base of GNSS devices by type
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
PLB EPIRB AIS-MOB AIS-SART ELT Telematics for humanitarian aid
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by type
PLB EPIRB AIS-MOB AIS-SART ELT Telematics for humanitarian aid
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
PLB EPIRB AIS-MOB AIS-SART ELT Telematics for humanitarian aid
Shipments of GNSS devices by type
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
PLB EPIRB AIS-MOB AIS-SART ELT Telematics for humanitarian aid
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by type
PLB EPIRB AIS-MOB AIS-SART ELT Telematics for humanitarian aid
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
PLB EPIRB AIS-MOB AIS-SART ELT Telematics for humanitarian aid
Shipments of GNSS devices by type
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
PLB EPIRB AIS-MOB AIS-SART ELT Telematics for humanitarian aid
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by type
PLB EPIRB AIS-MOB AIS-SART ELT Telematics for humanitarian aid
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
PLB EPIRB AIS-MOB AIS-SART ELT Telematics for humanitarian aid
Shipments of GNSS devices by type
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
PLB EPIRB AIS-MOB AIS-SART ELT Telematics for humanitarian aid
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by type
PLB EPIRB AIS-MOB AIS-SART ELT Telematics for humanitarian aid
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
PLB EPIRB AIS-MOB AIS-SART ELT Telematics for humanitarian aid
Shipments of GNSS devices by type
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND HUMANITARIAN AID91EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
REFERENCE CHARTS
Revenue from EO data sales by application
Revenue from EO services sales by application
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
€ (millions)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
Humanitarian aid
Post-event recovery
Prevention and mitigation
Situational awareness supporting search and rescue
Response
Preparedness
Humanitarian aid
Post-event recovery
Prevention and mitigation
Situational awareness supporting search and rescue
Response
Preparedness
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
€ (millions)
400
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application 400
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
€ (millions)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
Humanitarian aid
Post-event recovery
Prevention and mitigation
Situational awareness supporting search and rescue
Response
Preparedness
Humanitarian aid
Post-event recovery
Prevention and mitigation
Situational awareness supporting search and rescue
Response
Preparedness
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
€ (millions)
400
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application 400
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
Revenue from EO services sales by region
Revenue from EO data sales by region
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
400
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
400
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
ENERGY AND
RAW MATERIALS
ENERGY AND RAW MATERIALS
Stakeholders in the energy sector include energy project developers, utility companies,
energy asset manufacturers, financiers, as well as government institutions, energy traders
and supply chain managers. These actors leverage the potential of space data to plan and
monitor assets, audit environmental policies and regulation, and gain an overall information
edge. A multitude of applications in the energy domain derive substantial benefits from
EO data. Among these, a key function is the facilitation of site selection, planning and
monitoring. Satellite data proves instrumental in forecasting the potential for renewable
energy generation, in the context of solar, wind and hydropower energy sites. Furthermore,
it contributes to the enhancement of energy grid stability, and helps anticipate near-term
energy prices, by assessing real-time renewable energy production. Energy transmission
networks are similarly monitored from space, to ensure their integrity. Moreover, GNSS
technology is a key enabling technology for the synchronisation of energy network smart
grids through Phasor Measurement Units. Space data and services will prove essential to
this sector as the world accelerates the green energy transition.
Stakeholders in the raw materials sector, such as mining companies and associations,
financiers, government institutions, commodity traders, and supply chain managers,
operationalise EO and GNSS-powered services and products in various ways. For
example, space-based data enable efficiency improvements, the tracking of assets, and
monitoring of environmental impact. A key application within the raw materials sector is
that of exploration: satellite imagery helps identify areas with the highest mineral resources
potential. From an operations point of view, satellite imagery can help increase safety,
for example, by continuously monitoring mine pit and tailings slope stability. Such data is
furthermore leveraged to detect illegal mining activities, or to monitor the post-operational
phase of mines, particularly for site clean-up, rehabilitation and waste management.
Note: Topics mainly related to the Energy sub-segment are indicated with an orange circle
while the Raw Materials sub-segment topics are indicated with a blue circle .
What you can read in this chapter
• Key trends: Space data plays an important role in the energy sector, spanning from
permitting processes to grid balancing. Enhancing mineral exploration, sourcing, and
operational safety with space data for the raw materials sector.
• User perspective: Users across the entire energy and raw materials value chain use EO
and GNSS-powered services.
• Industry: Energy and raw materials value chains.
• Recent developments: Mining industry moves to fully automise a wide range of mining
operations and increase efficiency and site safety supported by space data. Offshore
wind farms deployments and smart grids leverage space data.
• Future market evolution: Digital twins will play a key role in optimising mining operations
and increasing safety, hyperspectral data provides cost-effective exploration applications.
EO can help us understand how climate change will impact renewable energy and help
assess environmental impact of renewable energy sites.
• European Systems: Current usage of Galileo and Copernicus in the energy and raw
materials sector.
• European projects: Several European-funded projects combine space data to propose
solutions in support of the Energy and Raw Materials sector.
• Reference charts: Yearly evolution of installed base of GNSS devices and revenues as well
as EO revenues by application and region.
© pexels.com
Application descriptions can be found in Annex 3.Renewable Energy
• Renewable energy assessment potential
and forecast
• Renewable energy plant design
optimisation
• Renewable energy site selection, plan-
ning and monitoring
• Risk assessment for renewable energy
assetsEnergy Network Fidelity
• Energy network conditions monitoring
• Phasor measurement units (PMU)Raw Materials
• Illegal mining monitoring
• Mineral exploration, site
planning/monitoring
• Mining vehicle management and controlEnvironmental Impact Monitoring
• Environmental impact assessment for
energy and raw materialsMarket Intelligence
• Supply chain insightsLegend
EO application
GNSS application
Synergetic application
(combined use of EO and GNSS)
92
ENERGY AND RAW MATERIALS93EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
KEY TRENDS
Space data plays an important role in the energy sector, spanning from
permitting processes to grid balancing
Key market trends for Energy
• The increasingly complex geopolitical context, climate change and rising energy demand drive governments to further accelerate the green energy transition
• Grid balancing is becoming a major issue as intermittent renewable technologies (wind, solar) increase variability and limited predictability of the energy supply
• Permitting procedures, which include Environmental Impact Assessments, are considered a key bottleneck to rapid deployment of renewable energies
• As climate change increases the frequency of extreme weather events, energy infrastructure is increasingly exposed to extreme ambient temperatures, floods, and high winds
The green energy transition is experiencing major acceleration
Energy markets face extreme volatility, driven by geopolitical developments such as the war in Ukraine,
increasing energy demand and a major shift in the energy mix as governments and businesses strive
to achieve decarbonisation targets. A key factor in reaching the energy transition goals is to increase
the share of electricity in the power mix and increase the share of renewables in the generation of
electricity, as electrification is one of the first decarbonisation levers. It is the least expensive and the
easiest to implement in most sectors. According to McKinsey, the demand for electricity in Europe is
projected to triple by 2050, at which time the overall energy mix is projected to consist of 50% electricity
and hydrogen.
Space data and services support this major shift in the energy mix
in various ways, through renewable energy resource assessments
(e.g. for wind, solar, hydro and tidal energy sources), environmental
impact analysis, and electricity grid synchronisation and balancing.
The responsible and effective deployment of renewable energy
technologies furthermore leverages space assets, accelerating
global efforts to decarbonise and mitigate climate change.
Long permitting procedures are holding back rapid deployments
of renewable energy projects
The permitting procedure for renewable energy projects involves a series of regulatory steps aimed at
ensuring compliance with environmental, safety and land use requirements. The procedure includes
conducting environmental impact assessments (EIAs), to evaluate potential ecological, social and economic
effects. Complexity, variety and excessive duration of the permitting process constitute a major barrier
to the swift necessary deployment of renewable energy. In some extremes, the permitting procedure can
take over eight years. To accelerate this, the Renewable Energy Directive requires Member States to permit
new renewable energy projects within two years and repowered projects (replacing old infrastructure)
within one year. The performance of EIAs can greatly benefit from satellite imagery as historical, current
and projected environmental or human settlement-related information can be derived, contributing
where knowledge and data gaps may otherwise occur. Furthermore, as part of the REPowerEU plan, the
European Commission has obligated EU Member States to identify ‘acceleration areas’. These are locations
with minimal foreseen environmental impact resulting from the construction of renewable energy sites. EO
information can support the identification and classification of these acceleration areas, specifically
aiding the evaluation of ecological risks such as potential impact on biodiversity.
© pexels.com
© iStock
The intermittent nature of renewable energy introduces complexity to grid
balancing
Grid balancing has emerged as a significant challenge due to the intermittent nature of renewable
energy sources. Unlike traditional fossil fuels, renewables such as solar and wind are subject to weather
variations, leading to fluctuations in energy production, which strains grid stability and requires
careful management as sudden drops in production causes voltage instability and potential blackouts,
where overproduction may create surges and overload the grid.
The process of balancing the grid greatly benefits from space data as derived insights provide real-
time information that enhance the integration of renewable energy sources and optimise energy
distribution. Specifically, space data and services can track weather patterns, cloud cover, solar
irradiance and wind speed, offering accurate near-term forecasts for renewable energy production.
This helps operators determine when to charge or discharge energy storage systems (or use excess
energy to produce storable clean fuels like hydrogen), and when to ramp up or slow down fossil fuel
energy production, crucial for maintaining a reliable and resilient electricity system. Additionally, satellite
imagery helps plan for grid infrastructure extensions (currently lacking readiness) to connect new
renewable energy projects.
Energy infrastructure more frequently exposed to extreme weather
and climate hazards
Energy infrastructure is increasingly vulnerable to extreme weather and climate hazards, such as extreme
ambient temperatures, high winds and flooding, driven by climate change. As most electricity infrastructure
is built for past or current climate conditions, these events can disrupt energy generation, transmission and
distribution, leading to grid instability and power outages. The process of assessing and mitigating the risks
of such events strongly relies on space data.
For example, early warning systems powered by space data can providereal-
time and predictive information about weather patterns, such as hurricanes,
storms and heatwaves, allowing operators to prepare and respond more
effectively. Vulnerability mapping, by identifying areas prone to flooding,
landslides, or coastal erosion, is furthermore supported by satellite imagery.
Additionally, climate modeling powered by EO data can help assess the likely
frequency or intensity of future extreme weather events.
94ENERGY AND RAW MATERIALS
KEY TRENDS
Europe redefines its approach to critical raw materials
EU’s Critical Raw Materials Act (CRMA) underscores the resilience, diversification, collaboration,
innovation and sustainability of the critical raw material supply chain. Key focal points of this initiatives
are to increase domestic capacities of raw materials extraction, processing and recycling with high
social and environmental standards. The Commission aims to strengthen the uptake and deployment
of breakthrough technologies, such as space data, that plays an important role throughout a mine’s
life cycle, from reconnaissance to post-closure. Space data
can also help accelerate the objectives set out by the EU.
Highlighting environmental sustainability as a central theme
in the CRMA, space data enables the continuous monitoring
of a mine’s ecological impact, in addition to increasing mine
operations safety and overall efficiency. Space data integration
into a mine’s operational management, both in Europe and
beyond, will support better informed and environmentally
conscious decisions in pursuit of Europe’s critical raw material
objectives.
Environmental concerns drive need to strictly monitor mining
environmental impact
Total carbon emissions from steel, aluminium, copper, nickel and cobalt output is estimated at 4.5Gt
of carbon dioxide equivalent, or 13.5% of global carbon dioxide emissions. Given the climate impact
of these emissions, there is a pressing need to monitor, make transparent and mitigate this impact.
Recently deployed satellite technologies, such as the Sentinel-5P, as well as foreseen future
satellites such as the Copernicus Anthropogenic Carbon
Dioxide Monitoring (CO2M) mission, provide an important
solution to increase this transparency, as mines across
the world can be objectively monitored. This presents a
unique and independent source of information to assess
the effectiveness of policy measures, and to track national
emission reduction targets and their impact towards
decarbonisation.
Reliable battery supply chains are key to electric vehicle uptake
Batteries typically account for 30% to 40% of the value of electric vehicles (EVs). The race to net zero
will be heavily dependent on the supply of critical minerals and metals required to manufacture such
batteries. The creation of efficient and sustainable supply chains is supported by space infrastructure, as
demonstrated by its ability to aid in the exploration of crucial battery minerals like lithium. The demand
for this key component of modern batteries has skyrocketed
as electric vehicles gain popularity.
EO satellites equipped with multispectral and hyperspectral
sensors can detect the unique spectral signatures of
lithium-rich areas, supporting feature discrimination, mineral
identification and abundance mapping. This data-driven
approach streamlines the exploration process, making it more
cost-effective and environmentally friendly.
Decarbonisation of mining operations
Faced with the pressing need to mitigate climate change and reduce climate-related business
risks, environmental regulations, and shifting market dynamics, mining companies are increasingly
embracing decarbonisation strategies. This transformation is not only a response to environmental
concerns but also a proactive business strategy aimed at ensuring long-term sustainability and resilience.
Mining companies are using a combination of solutions
such as renewables, corporate power purchase agreements
(PPAs), electrification, carbon offsetting, data management
and ensuring data integrity in environmental, social and
governance (ESG) reporting. The integration of space data
adds an extra layer of efficacy to these decarbonisation
efforts, specifically for reporting purposes and overall
environmental monitoring.
Enhancing mineral exploration, sourcing, and operational safety with space
data for the raw materials sector
Key market trends for raw materials
• Drastically increasing demand for (critical) raw materials is forcing Europe to diversify its imports, improve circularity and sustainability, and heavily invest in innovation
• Ensuring secure, resilient and sustainable battery supply chains will be a key factor in accelerating global uptake of electric vehicles
• Environmental concerns drive the need to strictly monitor mining environmental impact, with an increased focus on their greenhouse gas emissions
• Mining sector looking to decarbonise their operations to reduce business risk and minimise impact on climate
© pexels.com
© ESA
© pexels.com
© iStock
ENERGY AND RAW MATERIALS95EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
EO plays important role in slope stability monitoring
Mineral extraction activities create inherently unstable structures, such as mining pit slopes, tailings dams, or waste rock
piles (storing by-products of mining operations). These structures require constant monitoring so that (slope) failures
can be detected ahead of time, and appropriate measures can be taken to minimise risk and impact. Multitemporal
satellite radar data, such as those provided by Sentinel-1, is one of the key technologies used in the monitoring of such
structures, complemented by in-situ radar/monitoring systems.
Hyperspectral data used to identify mineral-rich areas
As easy access mineral sources are depleting, mining exploration projects are forced to explore the most remote parts
of the globe, making manual surveys expensive and time consuming. The identification and quantification of mineral
deposits leverage cost-effective solutions enabled by satellite imagery, where new in-orbit hyperspectral sensors are
particularly useful.
USER PERSPECTIVE
Sources of key EO and GNSS user requirements
The key EO and GNSS user requirements for the different application
groups within the energy and raw materials segment are, at EU level,
collected using a harmonised procedure.
Information is collected through extensive interactions with user groups,
providers and experts in a continuous process culminating at the User
Consultation Platforms (UCP). All relevant requirements are documented
in detail and updated regularly within the Report on Energy and Raw
Materials user needs and requirements. User requirements for Earth
Observation (EO) services and products – as well as their evolution – are
now also collected through the UCP. The process covers the EO user needs
and requirements of commercial users based on inputs from industry
experts and user groups, mirroring the existing process implemented for
GNSS.
Moreover, the collection of specific
requirements for Copernicus services and
products is supported by an integrated
process that involves different channels:
(i) dedicated studies (e.g. "NEXTSPACE"
project, "Copernicus for EC (C4EC)" study,
Commission Staff Working Document on
user needs), (ii) targeted consultations
organised by the European Commission
or the entrusted entities with the relevant
communities, (iii) regular and structured
exchanges among representatives of the
Copernicus governance structure and
Member States through the Copernicus
User Forum.
Users across the entire energy and raw materials value chain
use EO and GNSS-powered services
Estimating lifespans of wind turbines
Wind turbine manufacturers need to assess wind turbine suitability for specific site conditions according to IEC 61400
standards. They do this by evaluating the wind characteristics of specific locations and estimating the lifespan of various
turbine types. For these assessments, in-situ measurements (meteorological masts indicating speed, direction, pressure,
temperature, etc., as well as their location through GNSS) are used and complemented by satellite imagery to reduce
uncertainties of long-term projections.
Snow water equivalent assessments for hydropower
Hydropower companies aim to optimise water inflows and subsequent energy production. Insights into snow
distribution and snow water on a regional to global scale is in part enabled by satellite observations. Service providers
issue short- and long-term forecasts, based on advanced weather models and physical snowpack models, enabling
hydropower companies to anticipate future water supply and adapt their energy production levels accordingly (avoiding
under- or over-production).
Synchronisation needs are increasing with smart grid deployments
It is expected that existing and foreseen smart grid services will become more and more data driven due to the ongoing
adoption of 5G networks, the introduction of AI and the wide-scale deployment of IoT systems. This evolution goes hand
in hand with the widescale adoption of smart meters and sustainability objectives which further increase the amount
and resolution of data collected through the smart grid network. While these technologies are expected to allow the
implementation of microgrids using renewable energy, batteries for energy storage and generators to produce power as
a complement to the national grids, it will lead to growing needs for synchronisation of the entire energy grid. These
increasing requirements for robust and resilient timing and synchronisation can be provided through GNSS-enabled
timing receivers that are deployed across the energy grid.
96ENERGY AND RAW MATERIALS
• TRANSMISSION AND
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
OPERATORS
END USERS
• ABB*
• ERICSSON*
• HUAWEI
• NOKIA*
SYSTEM INTEGRATORS
DESIGN CONSULTANCIES
TESTING & MAINTENANCE
DEVICE
MANUFACTURERS
• ANALOG DEVICES
• CAMPBELL SCIENTIFIC
• HEXAGON*
• MEINBERG*
• SCHNEIDER ELECTRIC*
• SEPTENTRIO*
• TRIMBLE NAVIGATION
• VICTRON ENERGY*
COMPONENT
AND RECEIVER
MANUFACTURERS
INDUSTRY
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in GNSS and EO
downstream activities. Please note that enterprises listed in the data providers step of the value
chain often provide platforms as a service. For the sake of simplicity the data providers are not
repeated in other stages of the value chain in which they are active.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 13 and 23 for a comprehensive description of value chains and how to
interpret them at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the
company, though the actual area of activity might be wider
END USERS
INFORMATION
PROVIDERS
EO PRODUCTS
AND SERVICE
PROVIDERS
PLATFORM
PROVIDERS
INFRASTRUCTURE
PROVIDERS
DATA PROVIDERS
• AIRBUS*
• BLACKSKY
• CAPELLA SPACE
• E-GEOS*
• GEOSAT*
• GHGSAT
• ICEYE*
• MAXAR
• PLANET
• SATELLOGIC*
• UMBRA
• FUGRO*
• HEMISPHERE (ATLAS)
• HEXAGON*
• SAPCORDA*
• SWIFT
• TERIA*
• TOPCON
• TRIMBLE
• ARBITER
• BRANDYWINE
• CHRONOS TECHNOLOGY*
• ELPROMA*
• ENDRUN
• GORGY TIMING*
• HEXAGON*
• HOPF ELEKTRONIK*
• MASTERCLOCK
• MICROSEMI
• OMICRON*
• OROLIA*
• OSCILLOQUARTZ*
• SEIKO
• SEL
• SYNERGY SYSTEMS
• TIMELINK*
• AWS
• CLOUDFERRO*
• CLOUD PLGOOGLEATFORM
• IBM CLOUD
• MICROSOFT AZURE
• T-SYSTEMS*
• CLOUDEO*
• CREODIAS*
• EARTH-I
• EDS CEODE
• EURODATACUBE*
• GOOGLE EARTH ENGINE
• NORTH.IO*
• OPEN DATA CUBE
• PLANET EXPLORER
• SENTINEL-HUB*
(SINERGISE)
• UP42*
• CYIENT
• GEODATA*
• ICIS*
• OILX*
• NOVELTIS*
• S&P GLOBAL
• THE SNIFFERS*
• ENERGY COMPANIES
• ENERGY TRADERS
• ENVIRONMENTAL
AGENCIES
• GOVERNMENTAL
AUTHORITIES
• GRID OPERATORS
• PROJECT DEVELOPERS
• SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGERS
• UTILITY COMPANIES
EARTH
OBSERVATION
AUGMENTATION
SERVICE PROVIDERS
GNSS
• COPERNICUS SENTINELS*
• ENMAP*
• PRISMA*
• LANDSAT (USGS)
• METEOSAT (EUMETSAT)*
• RADARSAT (CSA)
• OTHER RELEVANT
EUROPEAN NATIONAL
MISSIONS
• RELEVANT IN-SITU
NETWORKS
• NATIONAL AND
REGIONAL RTK NETWORK
PROVIDERS
• FEDERATED
INFRASTRUCTURE
(E.G. GAIA-X)*
• SENTINEL COLLABORATIVE
GROUND SEGMENT*
• CODE-DE*
• COPERNICUS DATASPACE
ECOSYSTEM*
• OPENEO*
• WEKEO*
• CLIMATESCALE*
• CLS GROUP*
• DHI GROUP*
• EXOLABS*
• NEO*
• KSAT*
• LIVEEO*
• METEODYN*
• OHB*
• ORBITAL EYE*
• PIESAT
• REBASE.ENERGY*
• REUNIWATT*
• SATELLOGIC*
• SOLARGIS*
• SOLCAST
• SOLEA*
• TRANSVALOR*
• VORTEX*
• WEGAW*
• COPERNICUS ATMOSPHERE
MONITORING SERVICE (CAMS)*
• COPERNICUS CLIMATE
CHANGE SERVICE (C3S)*
• COPERNICUS MARINE
SERVICE (CMEMS)*
• COPERNICUS LAND
MONITORING SERVICE
(CLMS)*
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
European2 GNSS industry in the global arena
In the combined Energy and Raw Materials segment, European
companies capture approximately one-third of the global
market share for component and receiver manufacturing,
with major players such as Hexagon and Topcon, and over
40% of the system integration market, prominently led by
Ericsson. GNSS receivers in Energy are used for timing and
synchronisation purposes. European T&S System Integrators
such as Nokia and Ericsson own a combined two fifths of the
global Energy value chain.
Energy EO & GNSS Value Chain1
ENERGY AND RAW MATERIALS97EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
• MINING COMPANIES
• REGULATORY
AUTHORITIES
• ENVIRONMENTAL
AGENCIES
COMPONENT
AND RECEIVER
MANUFACTURERS
• AB VOLVO*
• CATERPILLAR
• EATON*
• ERICSSON*
• HEXAGON*
• KOMATSU
SYSTEM INTEGRATORS
DESIGN CONSULTANCIES
TESTING & MAINTENANCE
DEVICE
MANUFACTURERS
• ANALOG DEVICES
• CADDEN*
• CAMPBELL SCIENTIFIC
• CHCNAV
• HEXAGON*
• HEMISPHERE
• NOVATEL
• NUVOTON
• OXFORD TECHNICAL
SOLUTIONS*
• SEPTENTRIO*
• TOPCON
• TRIMBLE NAVIGATION
• YAGEO
COMPONENT
AND RECEIVER
MANUFACTURERS
INDUSTRY
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in GNSS and EO downstream activities. Please note that enterprises
listed in the data providers step of the value chain often provide platforms as a service. For the sake of simplicity the data providers are not
repeated in other stages of the value chain in which they are active.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 13 and 23 for a comprehensive description of value chains and how to interpret them at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the company, though the actual area of activity might be wider.
END USERS
INFORMATION
PROVIDERS
EO PRODUCTS
AND SERVICE
PROVIDERS
PLATFORM
PROVIDERS
INFRASTRUCTURE
PROVIDERS
DATA PROVIDERS
• AIRBUS*
• BLACKSKY
• CAPELLA SPACE
• E-GEOS*
• GEOSAT*
• GHGSAT
• ICEYE*
• MAXAR
• OHB
• PLANET
• SATELLOGIC*
• UMBRA
• FUGRO*
• HEMISPHERE (ATLAS)
• HEXAGON*
• SAPCORDA*
• SWIFT
• TERIA*
• TOPCON
• TRIMBLE
• CHCNAV
• HEXAGON*
• OUSTER
• RIEGL LASER
MEASUREMENT
SYSTEMS*
• SEPTENTRIO*
• TRIMBLE NAVIGATION
• AWS
• CLOUDFERRO*
• GOOGLE CLOUD
PLATFORM
• IBM CLOUD
• MICROSOFT AZURE
• T-SYSTEMS*
• CLOUDEO*
• CREODIAS*
• EARTH-I*
• EDS CEODE
• EURODATACUBE*
• GOOGLE EARTH ENGINE
• NORTH.IO*
• OPEN DATA CUBE
• PLANET EXPLORER
• SENTINEL-HUB
(SINERGISE)
• UP42*
• CODE-DE*
• COPERNICUS
DATASPACE
ECOSYSTEM*
• OPENEO*
• WEKEO*
• AGP MINING
• CGG*
• FLSMIDTH*
• FUGRO*
• KAYRROS*
• SLR CONSULTING*
• STANTEC
• SRK*
• DARES TECH*
• DESCARTES LABS
• EFTAS*
• GAF*
• GEOVILLE*
• OHB*
• ORBITAL INSIGHT
• ROSA EARTH*
• SATELLOGIC*
• S[&]T*
• SKYGEO*
• TERRAEYE*
• THEIAX*
• TRE ALTAMIRA*
• VITO*
• MINING COMPANIES
• SUPPLY CHAIN
MANAGERS
• ENERGY TRADERS
• GOVERNMENTAL
AUTHORITIES
EARTH
OBSERVATION
AUGMENTATION
SERVICE PROVIDERS
GNSS
• COPERNICUS
SENTINELS*
• ENMAP*
• PRISMA*
• LANDSAT (USGS)
• METEOSAT (EUMETSAT)*
• OTHER RELEVANT
EUROPEAN NATIONAL
MISSIONS
• RADARSAT (CSA)
• NATIONAL AND
REGIONAL RTK
NETWORK PROVIDERS
• FEDERATED
INFRASTRUCTURE
(E.G. GAIA-X)*
• SENTINEL
COLLABORATIVE
GROUND SEGMENT* • COPERNICUS EUROPEAN
GROUND MONITORING
SERVICE (EGMS)*
• COPERNICUS LAND
MONITORING SERVICE
(CLMS)*
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
European2 EO industry in the global arena
In 2021, European EO companies in the Energy and
Raw Materials segment held an estimated half of the
global market share. Top European companies in the full
segment include Airbus, CLS, and Leonardo (e-GEOS).
Raw Materials EO & GNSS Value Chain1
98ENERGY AND RAW MATERIALS
Mining industry moves to fully automise a wide range of mining operations
and increase efficiency and site safety supported by space data
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
As mining companies attempt to increase efficiency and safety through a variety of means, the
shipments of GNSS devices in this sector has seen steady growth in the past decade. Specifically in
large open pit mines, GNSS devices are utilised widely and are particularly suitable for fleet automation,
including autonomous hauling operations as well as automated blasting and drilling activities. More
recently, the use of digital twins in the mining industry as a means to increase operational awareness
is considered a strong driver for mine site data collection, including location information derived from
GNSS.
Shipments of phasor measurement units have seen steady growth in the past decade, with just
under 1 500 shipments in 2012, rising to over 8 000 shipments in 2022, illustrating their increasing
importance in the management of energy infrastructure. As smart grids (dependent on PMUs) are
becoming more common, the trend of the past decade is likely to continue.
GNSS key technology in move to automate of wide range of mining operations
GNSS is becoming a crucial technology in automating various mining operations, as active mines across
the globe have already implemented some level of autonomous and or automated mining equipment.
GNSS is a core enabling technology in these efforts. Rio Tinto’s Autonomous Haulage System, which
was introduced in 2022, handles over 130 autonomous haul trucks as part of the company’s iron ore
operations, and heavily relies on GNSS. It significantly reduces operator risks and lowers costs by
15%. Furthermore, GNSS enables the automation of drilling and blasting operations by accurately
determining the position and orientation of drilling equipment.
This not only enhances precision but also ensures safer
working conditions by reducing human involvement in
potentially hazardous activities. By automating surveying
and mapping tasks, enabled by GNSS receivers, surveyors
can quickly and accurately map mining areas, measure
stockpile volumes, and monitor ground deformation.
McKinsey estimates that by 2035 smart mining achieved
through autonomous mining using data analysis and
digital technologies including Artificial Intelligence will
save between $290 billion and $390 billion annually for
mineral raw materials producers.
SAR data plays increasingly important role in mining site safety monitoring
In mining operations, ensuring the safety and stability of critical assets is paramount. This is particularly
true for assets like tailings dams, waste stockpiles and open pit slopes, which demand continuous
monitoring to detect and prevent potential failures. To meet this challenge, an array of advanced
monitoring tools and technologies is employed. In-situ instrumentation, such as radars developed by
IDS Georadar, robotic total stations by Leica, and laser scanners, form the foundation of ground-based
monitoring systems. These tools are significantly enhanced by the integration of satellite-based
Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) data, with Sentinel 1 being a prominent example.
InSAR provides invaluable insights by detecting ground
movement with millimetre-level accuracy, even over
vast mining areas. Satellites often detect initial ground
movements, flagging an area as unstable. Afterwards,
ground-based radar systems are strategically aimed at
the area of concern to provide real-time monitoring. This
integrated approach to stability monitoring not only
enhances safety but also minimises the potential for costly
disruptions and environmental damage.
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
© iStock
© iStock
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
Mining vehicle management and control
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Phasor Measurement Units (PMU)
ENERGY AND RAW MATERIALS99EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Offshore wind farms deployments and smart grids leverage space data
Various applications in the energy and raw materials segment have been able to leverage enhanced
space-based sensing capabilities, such as improved revisit time and increased spatial and spectral
resolution. For the application of network (pipelines, powerlines) conditions monitoring, currently
accounting for 10% of the revenues, improved upstream capabilities enable EO service providers to
continuously improve their ability to monitor energy assets, further reducing the need for air and ground
patrols.
Furthermore, as illustrated by a two-third revenue share of approximately €200 million attributed to the
application of mineral exploration and site planning/monitoring, satellite imagery continues to provide
a safe and economically interesting alternative to in-situ data collection when exploring remote
areas with low data availability. This is considered a strong value driver in the sector, particularly for
exploration as ‘easy access’ deposits are increasingly depleted.
Moreover, as the green energy transition accelerates further, space-based data and services may
alleviate some of the of permitting bottlenecks related to environmental impact assessments,
generating additional growth in the sector.
SAR data helps assess atmospheric wakes of offshore wind farms
Offshore wind farm deployments are accelerated to satisfy the demand for renewable energy,
particularly in Northern Europe. These massive structures cause areas of increased turbulence and
reduced wind speeds downwind, known as atmospheric wakes, which can spread over tens of
kilometres, affecting the yields of potential new sites. The correct quantification of the resulting wind
velocity decrease is critical to accurately assess energy yields of sites placed in the wakes of existing
ones.
Satellite SAR data is particularly useful for
measuring wind speeds on the surface of the
ocean. Wind farm project developers can leverage
these data as a cost-effective way of assessing
large areas for potential wakes of existing
wind farms. These insights can in turn be used
to assist the localisation of subsequent in-situ
measurement campaigns, utilising equipment
such as ocean buoys, meteorological masts and
wind lidars.
Synchronisation quality at the core of smart grid protection and control
applications
The growing adoption of smart grids and PMUs is facilitated by substation digitisation, which has
reduced the amount of equipment per substation, while also leading to improved protection and control
applications such as real-time modelling, fault analysis, fault localisation and wide-area monitoring
(WAM). Improved data synchronisation quality is key to the protection of digital substations as well
as for the control applications. The accuracy of this data is measured in microseconds, as they require
accurate timestamping and a timely delivery.
State-of-the-art GNSS receivers, providing timing
and synchronisation information, can fulfil these
requirements and provide the necessary level of
quality, with the latest receivers contributing to
an overall higher level of resilience for the smart
grid. As a back-up time source, Precision Time
Protocol (PTP) concepts are being explored, with
some of these also relying on the use of GNSS
receivers.
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
Renewable energy site selection, planning and monitoring
Renewable energy plant design optimisation
Illegal mining monitoring
Supply chain insights
Renewable energy assessment potential and forecast
Risk assessment for renewable energy assets
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Environmental impact assessment for energy and raw materials
Energy Network conditions monitoring
0
50
00
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 0
50
100
150
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€
€315 million
10%10%
1%
1%
3%
2%
1%
10%
62%
Renewable Energy site selection, planning and monitoring
Illegal mining monitoring
Renewable energy plant design optimisation
Environmental impact assessment for energy and raw materials
Renewable energy assessment potential and forecast
Supply chain insights
Risk assessment for renewable energy assets
Energy Network conditions monitoring
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Energy & Raw Materials revenues from EO data & services sales
by application 2022
© pexels.com
© pexels.com
100ENERGY AND RAW MATERIALS
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
Digital twins will play a key role in optimising mining operations and increasing
safety, hyperspectral data provides cost-effective exploration applications
Shipments of GNSS devices by region
Open-pit mines are particularly suitable for GNSS-supported applications such as blasthole drilling
or fleet tracking and automation. The modelling methodology in the report has been updated to reflect
the increasing number of devices in use per mine. The distribution of open pit mines worldwide drives
the GNSS market, with the Americas, Asia-Pacific and Middle East and Africa generating the largest
demand. Conversely, this makes Europe’s demand for GNSS devices in the raw materials segment
relatively small on a global scale, as it merely hosts 10% of all open-pit mines. Furthermore, surface
mines in Europe often deploy very large bucket wheel excavators (such as those operating in German
lignite mines or Polish coal mines) rather than numerous blasthole drills and smaller excavators with
individual GNSS devices.
Modernisation of old energy infrastructure accelerates PMU deployments across the world. In the
past decade, the Asia Pacific and North America regions have been on the forefront of modernisation,
boasting the largest numbers of PMU devices shipped. Europe, the Middle East and Africa are starting
to catch up and are forecast to account for 40% of global PMU device shipments by 2033, up from 30%
in 2023. The GNSS device installed base per application can be found in the reference charts at the end
of this chapter.
Use of Digital Twins in the mining sector
Effectively managing engineering and asset information throughout a mining asset's lifecycle has
long posed a significant challenge for operators in the industry. To address this issue, a transformative
solution is emerging in the form of digital twins. These digital replicas offer a comprehensive
representation of physical assets, processes and systems, capturing both their core elements and the
dynamic interactions. Digital twins leverage cutting-edge technologies such as AI alongside advanced
software analytics, supported by (near-)real-time inputs like space data.
This enables the creation of dynamic, continually updated digital simulation models that mirror the
changes occurring in their physical counterparts, often referred to as their 'twins’. For instance, Anglo
American, a prominent UK-based mining company engaged in extracting commodities like nickel, coal,
and precious metals, has recently adopted digital twin technology at the Quellaveco copper mine in Peru.
Here, digital twins are being deployed to optimise the mining fleet, enhance operational efficiency
and boost safety standards.
Impact of new hyperspectral imaging satellites will further increase
applicability of space-based data for the raw materials sector
New hyperspectral satellite systems, such as PRISMA launched in 2019, EnMAP in 2022, and CHIME
due for launch by the end of this decade, as well as various commercial satellite constellations, will
produce hyperspectral data with a regional to global scale. This data is expected to further transform
the use of EO data in the raw materials industry. The public missions offer free access to hyperspectral
data, a game-changing alternative to expensive airborne acquisitions.
One of the most promising hyperspectral applications for the
mining industry is cost-effective exploration activities by
delivering mineral maps of large areas, or mineral detection
products (alteration zone maps, mineral vector maps) for
targeted exploration. Additionally, the increased spectral
range of this type of data (compared with those offered by
more dated in-orbit sensors) will enable more elaborate
and precise monitoring of environmental indicators.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
32 2033
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
2021 2022
t Units (PMU)
© Italian Space Agency
ENERGY AND RAW MATERIALS101EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
EO can help us understand how climate change will impact renewable energy
and help assess environmental impact of renewable energy sites
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application
Climate change is impacting potential of renewable energy sources and EO
data can help understand these changes
Longer-term climate change may significantly affect the energy potential of renewable energy
systems, particularly wind power. Over the next few decades, substantial shifts in wind characteristics
are anticipated due to the ongoing rise in average global temperatures. As temperatures increase, air
density decreases, which directly impacts wind power potential. This poses a considerable challenge
for the renewable energy sector. To address this issue, research initiatives like the KliWiSt project, aim to
analyse historical climate data and near-future
projections (with a focus on the next 50 years).
These efforts aim to comprehensively understand
how climatic changes will impact wind patterns
and, consequently, wind farm yields. Crucially,
EO data is heavily utilised for this research, as
it provides invaluable insights into climate
variability, helping us gain a deeper understanding
of these changes.
Satellite imagery enables independent environmental assessments
for renewable energy deployments
A critical hurdle in the widespread adoption of renewable energy is not just its cost, but also the careful
management of land use. The challenge lies in deploying extensive wind and solar parks to meet
challenging renewable energy goals, while minimising adverse effects on stakeholders like nature and
biodiversity. As environmental considerations become increasingly stringent, EO data emerges as an
important tool in evaluating the suitability of specific regions for the establishment of renewable energy
installations.
By harnessing the insights gained from
space data, stakeholders can make informed
decisions about where to place renewable
energy infrastructure, identifying areas that
have minimal ecological sensitivity and lower
risks to biodiversity.
© NASA
© iStock
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Renewable energy site selection, planning and monitoring
Renewable energy plant design optimisation
Illegal mining monitoring
Supply chain insights
Renewable energy assessment potential and forecast
Risk assessment for renewable energy assets
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Environmental impact assessment for energy and raw materials
Energy Network conditions monitoring
Renewable energy site selection, planning and monitoring
Renewable energy plant design optimisation
Illegal mining monitoring
Supply chain insights
Renewable energy assessment potential and forecast
Risk assessment for renewable energy assets
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Environmental impact assessment for energy and raw materials
Energy Network conditions monitoring
0
50
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
€315 million
10%10%
1%
1%
3%
2%
1%
10%
Renewable Energy site selection, planning and monitoring
Illegal mining monitoring
Renewable energy plant design optimisation
Environmental impact assessment for energy and raw materials
Renewable energy assessment potential and forecast
Supply chain insights
Risk assessment for renewable energy assets
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
EO data and services sales in the energy and raw materials segment are forecast to increase at a
compounded annual growth rate of 3% from an estimated €330 million in 2023 to over €450 million
in 2033.
Energy network conditions monitoring is the application with the largest foreseen relative growth in
the next decade, with around 70% higher revenues forecast for 2033 as compared to 2023. This growth
is driven by the desire for more environmentally conscious infrastructure monitoring (minimising use of
helicopters or ground patrols), as well as maturing downstream capabilities which enable wide-scale
and autonomous monitoring. More performant upstream solutions are considered an important growth
driver in this segment as well, such as the deployment of hyperspectral imaging sensors, which produce
data particularly useful for the exploration activities of mining companies.
This translates into significant opportunities for the application of mineral exploration, site planning
and monitoring, which will see yearly revenues increase by almost €60 million over the next decade.
102ENERGY AND RAW MATERIALS
Current usage of Copernicus for Energy
The Energy Operational Service of C3S delivers key information for climate-related indicators relevant
to the European energy sector, such as electricity demand and renewables production. CAMS provides
solar irradiance data, which is critically important for planning and operating solar installations. C3S and
CAMS are also well suited for long-term projections and optimisation of energy systems, to forecast the
future energy mix as well as its reliability. The services furthermore help to understand the reliance of
renewables on the (changing) climate system underpinning them. CMEMS, which is partly powered by
Sentinel-3 and 6, provides data related to surface temperature, water conditions and water level useful
for onshore, offshore and tidal energy installations. For specific wind farm analysis, service providers
rely on the climate re-analysis dataset ERA5 under C3S as well as CLMS for land cover and elevation
assessments. The data are dynamically downscaled and provide information at windfarm scale, which
are used in the investor due diligence process.
Current usage of Copernicus for Raw Materials
The European Ground Monitoring System, powered in part by Sentinel-1 InSAR data, enables services
for ground motion monitoring. Such services, often working in conjunction with GNSS, are essential for
mining (safety) operations. Sentinel-1 data also enables water regime monitoring to map acid mine
drainage characteristics and predict its impact on surrounding ground water levels. Sentinel-2 data
(e.g. Red-Edge, NDVI, etc.) is used to provide a baseline vegetation study prior to the start of mining
activities and continuously monitor the stress on vegetation over time. CLMS provides a wide range
of biophysical parameters (e.g. land cover) which further support site selection and monitoring in the
mining sector.
Current usage of EGNSS for Energy
The integration of Galileo capabilities within Phasor Measurement Units (PMUs) is increasing steadily.
PMUs are devices used in electric power systems to measure and monitor the real-time electrical
conditions, such as voltage, current, power and frequency. They are primarily used for monitoring
and controlling the stability and reliability of power grids. PMUs typically rely on GPS or other
GNSS for accurate time synchronisation of the measurements. GPS is the most widely used GNSS
in PMUs due to its availability, accuracy and well-established infrastructure. While Galileo aims to
provide independent, reliable, and accurate positioning, navigation, and timing services, its adoption
in PMUs is still relatively limited. This is primarily because GPS has become the de facto standard
for PMUs, and most existing installations and infrastructure are designed around GPS. However, as
the Galileo constellation continues to expand and more satellites become operational, there may be
wider adoption of Galileo in the future. It could provide an alternative or backup to GPS for PMUs,
enhancing the overall redundancy and reliability of the positioning and timing data used in power grid
monitoring and control applications.
Current usage of EGNSS for Raw Materials
The highly accurate positioning capabilities of Galileo are crucial for the extraction, mining and
transportation of raw material production. Supported by RTK networks, centimetre-level accuracy
enables precise surveying/monitoring and machine guidance that support resource exploration,
optimised excavation and efficient logistics planning. Galileo provides integrity monitoring and
authentication capabilities, ensuring the wholeness of the positioning information and protecting
against spoofing or jamming attempts. These security measures can enhance safety in mining
operations that rely on machine guidance.
EUROPEAN SYSTEMS
Current usage of Galileo and Copernicus
Terminology used on this page is explained in Annex 2 for both GNSS and EO performance parameters.
Sentinels
Copernicus Services
Marine
(CMEMS)
Land
(CLMS)
Atmosphere
(CAMS)
Climate Change
(C3S)
Sentinel-2Sentinel-1 Sentinel-3 Sentinel-6
High accuracy
service
More Robust
Timing
Greater Timing
Service
Availability
Resilience
Higher Timing
Accuracy
Authentication
features
Dual-
frequency
GalileoGalileo
EGNOS
ENERGY AND RAW MATERIALS103EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
EUROPEAN PROJECTS
Several European-funded projects combine space data to propose solutions
in support of the Energy and Raw Materials sector
Climate forecast enabled knowledge services – CLARA
The aim of the CLARA innovation action was to develop a set of leading-edge climate services
building upon the newly developed Copernicus Climate Change Services near-term forecasts and
sectorial information systems (SIS) and sustain their marketability and value. It aimed to facilitate
the development of new climate services and enhanced existing ones by drawing on the recent
seasonal to decadal projections and projections developed under the Copernicus Climate Change
Services (C3S). Moreover, the project set out to analyse and demonstrate the economic and social
value of climate forecast enabled climate services and corroborate the ensuing direct and indirect
benefits various end users and customers obtain from them including reduced risk, more efficient
resource management and improved resilience to climate variability and change. The activities
included engaging service developers, purveyors and end-users in mutually beneficial collaboration
and partnerships for service co-design, co-development, co-assessment and co-delivery. Lastly, it
strived to contribute to advancing European innovation, competitiveness and market performance
for climate services, by designing and implementing innovative exploitation, business and market-
oriented activities.
More information available at: https://www.clara-project.eu/
Multi-source and multi-scale earth observation and novel machine learning
methods for mineral exploration and mine site monitoring – MULTIMINER
Earth Observation data can aid mineral exploration and mining activities. The EU-funded
MultiMiner project will develop innovative data processing algorithms based on machine learning
for cost-effective utilisation of EO technologies for mineral exploration and mine site monitoring.
In this way, it will unlock the potential of EO data, including Copernicus, commercial satellites,
upcoming missions, airborne and low altitude, and in situ data. The project will focus on novel EO-
based exploration technologies for critical raw materials to increase the probability of finding new
sources within the EU, thus reinforcing its autonomy in the raw materials sector. MultiMiner will
create generic but highly innovative machine learning solutions with extremely low environmental
impact to support the entire mining life cycle.
More information available at: https://www.multiminer.eu/
Renewable energy sources power forecasting and synchronization for smart
grid networks management – RESPONDENT
As the EU seeks to transition from a system of legacy energy and an over-reliance on fossil fuels
to a new era of clean, sustainable energy, the bloc has been seeking dynamic and effective ways
to turn this vision into a reality. Although the EU has made significant strides in increasing its use of
renewable energy sources (RES), more needs to be done if the most calamitous effects of climate
change are to be mitigated or reversed. Furthermore, the desire of the EU to shift away from fossil
fuels, the majority of which are imported, would also leave it less exposed to external geopolitical
factors that threaten the energy security of the bloc. The RESPONDENT project, through the
utilisation and leveraging of both Galileo and Copernicus systems and services, aims to develop and
promote the integration of RES into Europe’s existing power grids, as well as to demonstrate their
viability and reliability compared to traditional sources of energy that are wreaking havoc on global
temperatures and accelerating the most destructive impacts of our rapidly changing climate.
More information available at: https://respondent-project.eu/
Multiscale observation services for mining-related deposits - MOSMIN
The MOSMIN project aims to develop holistic, full-site services for the geotechnical and environmental
monitoring as well as valorisation of mining-related deposits. For this, the team aims to combine
EO and geophysical data. Copernicus data specifically is used for large-scale monitoring of ground
deformation and surface composition. Change detection algorithms will highlight displacements and
identify environmental hazards. Satellite data will be integrated with real-time, high resolution data
obtained from unoccupied aerial vehicles and sensors installed at the site, leveraging the power of
machine learning for fusion and resolution enhancement of multi-scale, multi-source data. Novel,
non-invasive geophysical techniques such as distributed fibre-optic sensing will provide subsurface
information to identify resource potential, and risks such as internal deformation and seepage.
The MOSMIN team collaborates with international mining companies, using pilot sites in the EU, South
America, and Africa to develop and trial comprehensive monitoring services.
More information available at: https://www.euspa.europa.eu/mosmin-multiscale-observation-
services-mining-related-deposits
Horizon Europe,
a programme of the
European Union
Horizon Europe,
a programme of the
European Union
Horizon Europe,
a programme of the
European Union
104ENERGY AND RAW MATERIALS
REFERENCE CHARTS
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
Revenue from GNSS device sales by region Revenue from GNSS device sales by application
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Mining vehicle management and control
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Phasor Measurement Units (PMU)
Mining vehicle management and control
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Phasor Measurement Units (PMU)
Mining vehicle management and control
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Phasor Measurement Units (PMU)
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Mining vehicle management and control
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Phasor Measurement Units (PMU)
Mining vehicle management and control
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Phasor Measurement Units (PMU)
Mining vehicle management and control
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Phasor Measurement Units (PMU)
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Mining vehicle management and control
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Phasor Measurement Units (PMU)
Mining vehicle management and control
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Phasor Measurement Units (PMU)
Mining vehicle management and control
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Phasor Measurement Units (PMU)
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Mining vehicle management and control
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Phasor Measurement Units (PMU)
Mining vehicle management and control
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Phasor Measurement Units (PMU)
Mining vehicle management and control
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Phasor Measurement Units (PMU)
ENERGY AND RAW MATERIALS105EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
REFERENCE CHARTS
Revenue from EO data sales by application
Revenue from EO services sales by application
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
€ (millions)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
Renewable energy site selection, planning and monitoring
Renewable energy plant design optimisation
Illegal mining monitoring
Supply chain insights
Renewable energy assessment potential and forecast
Risk assessment for renewable energy assets
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Environmental impact assessment for energy and raw materials
Energy Network conditions monitoring
Renewable energy site selection, planning and monitoring
Renewable energy plant design optimisation
Illegal mining monitoring
Supply chain insights
Renewable energy assessment potential and forecast
Risk assessment for renewable energy assets
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Environmental impact assessment for energy and raw materials
Energy Network conditions monitoring
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
€ (millions)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
€ (millions)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
Renewable energy site selection, planning and monitoring
Renewable energy plant design optimisation
Illegal mining monitoring
Supply chain insights
Renewable energy assessment potential and forecast
Risk assessment for renewable energy assets
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Environmental impact assessment for energy and raw materials
Energy Network conditions monitoring
Renewable energy site selection, planning and monitoring
Renewable energy plant design optimisation
Illegal mining monitoring
Supply chain insights
Renewable energy assessment potential and forecast
Risk assessment for renewable energy assets
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring
Environmental impact assessment for energy and raw materials
Energy Network conditions monitoring
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
Revenue from EO data sales by region
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
33
oring
oring
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
33
oring
oring
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE
FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE
Fisheries and aquaculture are an essential part of the economy and a major contributor
to food production – fishermen, fishing companies and societies depend on a sufficient
and sustainable catch.
Several applications of satellite data support this segment. In the domain of fisheries, EO
is used to assess the location of fish stocks and to potentially optimise fishing efforts.
Optical and radar data is also used to trace and ‘see’ fishing vessels and assess the
legality of their actions, thus also helping to prevent and combat illegal, unreported and
unregulated (IUU) fishing. GNSS also contributes to IUU detection with its traditional use
in the field, namely tracking the location of vessels through an Automatic Identification
System (AIS) and Vessel Monitoring System (VMS). Another no less important application
of GNSS data for fisheries relates to improving safety at sea for fishing vessels and their
crews by using GNSS-enabled navigation devices as well as AIS for collision avoidance.
In the field of aquaculture, EO-based applications support site selection for future fish
farms, often in the form of maritime spatial planning products. Both EO and GNSS
applications contribute to the optimisation, planning and monitoring of aquaculture
operations, both at sea and inland, by providing a host of information to aquafarmers.
Note: Topics mainly related to the fisheries sub-segment are indicated with an orange
circle , while the aquaculture sub-segment topics are indicated with a blue circle .
Cross-reference: GNSS-enabled Search and Rescue beacons, whilst used by fishermen
and installed onboard fishing vessels, are presented and quantified in the Emergency
Management and Humanitarian Aid market segment.
What you can read in this chapter
• Key trends: Innovation and efficiency are key to addressing the sustainability-related
challenges within the fishing and aquaculture industries.
• User requirements: Optimising activities within the sector through regulation and
better maritime spatial planning.
• Industry: Fisheries and aquaculture value chains.
• Recent developments: Digitalisation of aquaculture and fish stock modelling driving
adoption of space solutions.
• Future market evolution: EO and Galileo differentiators support the growth and
sustainability of the blue economy.
• European systems and projects: Several European-funded projects utilise space data
to develop innovative solutions in fisheries and aquaculture.
• Reference charts: Yearly evolution of installed base of GNSS devices and revenues as
well as EO revenues by application and region.
© iStock
Application descriptions can be found in Annex 3.Aquaculture
• Aquaculture operations optimisation
• Aquaculture site selectionFisheries
• Catch optimisation
• Fish stock detection and modelling
• Fish provenance and ecolabelling
• Fishing aggregating devices
• Fishing vessels navigation
• Illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing (IUU) controlLegend
EO application
GNSS application
Synergetic application
(combined use of EO and GNSS)
106
FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE107EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
KEY TRENDS
Various environmental, economic and regulatory dynamics are resulting
in an increased focus on the sustainability and resilience of our oceans
In addition to climate concerns, the fisheries and aquaculture sector operates within a multifaceted
global context, which encompasses several key dynamics. Firstly, the blue economy is gaining
prominence, marked by activities such as maritime spatial planning (e.g. wind energy installations,
blue carbon sequestration efforts) and advancements in marine biotechnology. Secondly, efforts
are being directed towards the sustainable management of oceans and seas, guided by an ecosystem-
based approach. Initiatives like the European Green Deal and the development of comprehensive
knowledge bases, such as the Digital Twin of the Ocean, play crucial roles in this endeavour.
Other major initiatives include the United Nations' Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable
Development, the European Union's mission to restore oceans by 2030, the forthcoming Treaty on
the High Seas, as well as the EU’s aquaculture guidelines, which identify 13 areas where further work
is needed to promote the sustainability, competitiveness and resilience of EU aquaculture. A global
perspective on fisheries and aquaculture is also needed by the growing demand for food. Addressing
global food inequalities involves diversifying aquaculture practices and designing resilient
aquafarms capable of withstanding the impacts of climate change, thereby producing food and
other derived products in as efficient a manner as possible.
Digitisation continuing to improve the sector with automation on the rise
Digital solutions are key to unlocking efficiency gains in the fisheries and aquaculture sector.
Automation plays a transformative role in various crucial aspects of operations and the value
chain. This includes automating fish processing, the use of fish aggregating devices (FADs), deploying
Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) and Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROVs) for underwater
exploration, mapping fish habitats, inspecting aquaculture farms, optimising feed usage, managing
waste, and maintaining water quality in and around fish farms. Moreover, traceability of fishery
operations is a topic that has become more and more pertinent in recent years. By using EO and
GNSS in conjunction with other sources of data (i.e., Cooperative Surveillance Systems (CSS), AIS
and VMS), digital solutions can now better address issues like Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated
fishing (IUU) and securely log findings via blockchain technology, reducing the need for on-the-
spot checks. Similar approaches can also be applied to monitor catch origins and certify against given
regulatory criteria.
Applying cutting-edge technologies to EO and GNSS data is driving
innovation in the sector
The integration of diverse datasets from sources such as fishing vessels, satellites, in-situ measurements
and weather stations is driving the emergence of cutting-edge technologies such as Big Data Analytics
and AI-powered predictive services in the fisheries sector. These services could play a pivotal role in
species forecasting, detecting, identifying, and sizing of catches, thereby enhancing fishing decisions
and facilitating quota tracking.
The fusion and analysis of multiple data streams can involve EO and GNSS data in conjunction
with various vessel and in-situ sources to offer never-before-seen predictive insights. Additionally,
the deployment of 5G, long-range radio (LoRa), and radiofrequency techniques for vessel detection
(notable companies in this domain include Unseenlabs and Hawkeye 360), along with cost-effective
satellite connectivity and broadband access from Starlink and OneWeb are reshaping the diversity and
availability of valuable data sources within the industry.
Innovation and efficiency are key to addressing the sustainability-related
challenges within the fishing and aquaculture industries
Key market trends
• Various environmental, economic and regulatory dynamics are driving several sustainability-related efforts in the sector
• Efficiency and sustainable use of resources is now a major focus in fisheries & aquaculture, with new technologies helping us to reach these goals
• Applying cutting-edge technologies such as Big Data Analytics and AI to EO and GNSS data is driving innovation in the sector
© pexels.com
108FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE
USER PERSPECTIVE
Sources of key EO and GNSS user requirements
The key EO and GNSS user requirements for the different application groups within the fisheries and aquaculture segment are collected using a harmonised procedure at
EU level.
Information is collected through extensive interactions with user groups, providers and experts in a continuous process culminating at the User Consultation Platforms
(UCP). All relevant requirements are documented in detail and updated regularly within the Report on Maritime, Inland Waterways, Fisheries and Aquaculture user needs
and requirements. User requirements for Earth Observation (EO) services and products – as well as their evolution – are now also collected through the UCP. The process
covers the EO user needs and requirements of commercial users based on inputs from industry experts and user groups, mirroring the existing process implemented for
GNSS.
Moreover, the collection of specific requirements for Copernicus services and products is supported by an integrated process that involves different channels: (i) dedicated
studies (e.g. "NEXTSPACE" project, "Copernicus for EC (C4EC)" study, Commission Staff Working Document on user needs), (ii) targeted consultations organised by the
European Commission or the entrusted entities with the relevant communities, (iii) regular and structured exchanges among representatives of the Copernicus governance
structure and Member States through the Copernicus User Forum.
Optimising activities within the sector through regulation and better
maritime spatial planning
EO and GNSS contribute to sustainability of fisheries by supporting
regulation and control
In order for fisheries to remain sustainable, regulation is needed across the sector. Fisheries can
now benefit from the adoption of EO and GNSS to help them keep their operations in line with
what is required from a policy point of view. In 2022, EUSPA and the European Fisheries Control
Agency (EFCA), the EU entity responsible for coordinating national fisheries operational activities
and assisting Member States in implementing the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP), formalised their
collaboration through a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU). This agreement underscores the
shared dedication of both agencies to fostering sustainable fisheries and aquaculture, which are
integral components of the EU’s “new approach for a sustainable blue economy”, an initiative
which aims to ensure the blue economy plays its part in achieving the goals of European Union's
Green Deal. Through this MoU, EUSPA will support EFCA in optimising the utilisation of the EU
Space Programme, particularly the Galileo and Copernicus programmes.
Complementing EFCA's efforts, various public, private and non-governmental initiatives have
emerged with the objective of bolstering sustainable fishing practices by enhancing traceability
from catch to plate. Organisations including the Marine Stewardship Council (MSC) are establishing
standards to address critical social and environmental impacts, placing a strong emphasis on
traceability. EO and GNSS technologies play pivotal roles in enabling traceability features.
For instance, the AIS can be combined with EO to seamlessly monitor certified fishing fleets,
thereby facilitating sustainable seafood production. Furthermore, in 2023, the United Nations'
193 Member States ratified a groundbreaking legally binding marine biodiversity agreement after
nearly two decades of intense negotiations. This treaty, known as BBNJ (biodiversity beyond national
jurisdiction), establishes a mechanism for the creation of extensive marine protected areas in the
high seas. It also sets out provisions for equitable sharing of benefits derived from marine genetic
resources, along with provisions for capacity building and the transfer of marine technology among
the participating parties.
Maritime Spatial Planning – optimising site selection
Planning the development of any type of infrastructure in a marine environment brings with it unique
challenges; this is where EO-aided Maritime Spatial Planning (MSP) can help the aquaculture sector.
MSP represents a holistic approach aimed at balancing the growing demand for maritime areas
by both traditional and emerging sectors while safeguarding the integrity of marine ecosystems.
The European Maritime Spatial Planning Platform serves as an invaluable information and
communication hub, offering comprehensive assistance to all EU Member States in their MSP
implementation endeavours. It operates with financial support from the EU Directorate General for
Maritime Affairs and Fisheries (DG MARE) and acts as the central forum for sharing the wealth of
knowledge generated through past, ongoing, and upcoming MSP initiatives and projects.
This serves as a foundation for government officials, planners and other stakeholders interested
in MSP, enabling them to leverage existing resources, prevent redundancy, facilitate capacity
development and promote the evolution of innovative practices. Within the aquaculture sector, EO-
based applications primarily support the identification of suitable sites for future fish farms. These
applications incorporate environmental factors, forecasts and predictions, often in the context of
maritime spatial planning products. Regulatory authorities delineate specific zones designated for
aquaculture as part of a strategic coastal spatial planning process, which may occur at the local,
regional or national level. In this process, environmental data is amalgamated with administrative and
socio-economic criteria to determine the appropriateness of an area for aquaculture development.
In addition, projects such as MSP-GREEN and PLASMAR+ have taken further steps to promote the
advancement of several aspects relating to MSP, including the development of new tools based
and the identification of technological gaps in MSP applications.
FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE109EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
INDUSTRY
Fisheries and Aquaculture Value Chains1
END USERS
INFORMATION
PROVIDERS
USERS OF
POSITIONING
INFORMATION
EO PRODUCTS AND
SERVICE
PROVIDERS
USERS
PLATFORM
PROVIDERS
SYSTEM INTEGRATORS
DESIGN CONSULTANCIES
TESTING & MAINTENANCE
INFRASTRUCTURE
PROVIDERS
COMPONENT
AND RECEIVER
MANUFACTURERS
DATA PROVIDERS
MARITIME
ORGANISATIONS
• CIRM – AN
INTERNATIONAL
ASSOCIATION FOR
MARINE ELECTRONICS
COMPANIES
• AWS
• CLOUDFERRO*
• GOOGLE CLOUD
PLATFORM
• IBM CLOUD
• MICROSOFT AZURE
• T-SYSTEMS*
• ADVANTECH
• ALPHATRON MARINE*
(PART OF JAPAN RADIO CO)
• BEIJER ELECTRONICS*
• CADDEN
• CHCNAV
• COBHAM*
• COBRA ELECTRONICS
• FURUNO ELECTRIC
• GARMIN
• GENERAL ELECTRIC
• GMT CO.
• HEXAGON*
• INTELLIAN TECHNOLOGIES
• KONGSBERG MARITIME*
• NAVICO*
• NUVOTON
• ORBCOMM
• SEPTENTRIO*
• WARTSILA*
• U-BLOX*
• UNISTRONG GNSS
• AB VOLVO*
• BEIBU GULF PORT GROUP
• COBHAM*
• FURUNO ELECTRIC
• GME
• HYUNDAI
• INMARSAT*
• JAPAN RADIO CO
• JOHNSON OUTDOORS
• KONGSBERG MARITIME*
• MITSUBISHI
• PARTNER PLAST*
• PRONAV
• SAAB*
• SAMYUNG ENC
• WARTSILA*
• UNISTRONG GNSS*
• VIASAT
• XIAMEN YAXON NETWORK
• XINUO
• ACRI*
• BERRING DATA
COLLECTIVE*
• BIOCEANOR*
• CLS*
• DEIMOS*
• EOMAP*
• KSAT*
• OCEANMIND*
• PLANETEK*
• PML*
• SKYTRUTH
• VAKE*
• VITO*
• WATER INSIGHT*
• FISHING BOAT OPERATORS
• RECREATIONAL BOATERS
• BREVISCO*
• DELTARES*
• DNV*
• GLOBAL MARITIME*
• INNOVASEA
• SEASCAPE*
• FISHING COMPANIES
• PORT AUTHORITIES
• SURVEILLANCE
AUTHORITIES
• DATA-ANALYTICS
COMPANIES:
• MARINETRAFFIC,
MYSHIPTRACKING,
VESSELTRACKER
• FISHERIES
• AQUAFARMERS
• ENVIRONMENTAL
AGENCIES
• CONSERVATION GROUPS
• NGOS
• MARINE RESEARCH
INSTITUTES
• MARINE PROTECTION
AGENCIES
• SUPERMARKETS
EARTH
OBSERVATION
GNSS
• AIRBUS*
• BLACKSKY
• CAPELLA SPACE
• GEOSAT*
• ICEYE*
• E-GEOS*
• MAXAR
• PLANET
• SATELLOGIC*
• UMBRA
• COPERNICUS SENTINELS*
• LANDSAT (USGS)
• METEOSAT (EUMETSAT)*
• RADARSAT (CSA)
• RELEVANT IN-SITU
NETWORKS
• RELEVANT EUROPEAN
NATIONAL MISSIONS
• METEOROLOGICAL
AGENCIES
• OCEANOGRAPHIC
AGENCIES
• EFCA – EUROPEAN
FISHERIES CONTROL
AGENCY
• EMSA – EUROPEAN
MARITIME SAFETY AGENCY
• FEDERATED
INFRASTRUCTURE
(E.G. GAIA-X)*
• SENTINEL COLLABORATIVE
GROUND SEGMENT*
• CLOUDEO*
• CREODIAS*
• EARTH-I*
• EDS CEODE
• EURODATACUBE*
• GOOGLE EARTH ENGINE
• NORTH.IO*
• OPEN DATA CUBE
• PLANET EXPLORER
• SENTINEL-HUB*
(SINERGISE)
• TERRADUE*
• UP42*
• COPERNICUS DATASPACE
ECOSYSTEM*
• OPENEO*
• COASTAL TEP*
• WEKEO*
• COPERNICUS MARINE
SERVICE (CMEMS)*
• BGS*
• ILVO*
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in GNSS and EO downstream activities. Please
note that enterprises listed in the data providers step of the value chain often provide platforms as a service. For the sake of
simplicity, the data providers are not repeated in other stages of the value chain in which they are active.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 13 and 23 for a comprehensive description of value chains and how to interpret them at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the company, though the actual area of
activity might be wider.
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
European2 EO and GNSS industry in the global arena
European companies dominate the Fisheries and Aquaculture segment for
EO with over two thirds of the global market share. Top European companies
leading the segment include Airbus, CLS, Leonardo (e-GEOS), and KSAT.
GNSS receivers in Fisheries and Aquaculture are similar to those used in
Maritime and Inland Waterways, with a significant overlap in terms of industry.
European companies such as Navico, Kongsberg, and Wärtsilä hold almost half
of the total market for component and receiver manufacturing combined.
110FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Digitalisation of aquaculture and fish stock modelling driving adoption
of space solutions
The annual sales of navigational devices greatly increased over the past decade, almost doubling from
just over 80 000 units in 2012 to nearly 160 000 units in 2022. This growth could be attributed
to navigational safety being substantially enhanced by the adoption of dedicated navigation devices,
particularly when paired with an AIS that supports collision avoidance. The overall shipment figures
grew from just under 100 000 units in 2012 to just shy of 200 000 units in 2022.
In the realm of combating Illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing, VMS and AIS devices
had shipped nearly 32 000 units by 2022. VMS, mandatory for vessels of more than 12m long, is
a satellite-based monitoring system that furnishes fisheries authorities with critical data on vessel
location, trajectory and activity.
Conversely, AIS serves as a safety radio system enabling the exchange of navigation and other pertinent
data between ships and with shore-based facilities, and it is mandated for vessels measuring 15 metres
or more. Both of these systems play a pivotal role in aiding authorities in monitoring vessel movements,
rendering valuable assistance in the fight against IUU activities. Therefore, they are collectively addressed
within the context of IUU control applications
Fish stock modelling and Artificial Intelligence
EO services and products can play a pivotal role in monitoring and modeling fish stock or shoal locations,
as well as optimising fishing operations. These applications harness physical and bio-geochemical
analyses, along with forecasting techniques, to gain insights into the vulnerability or resilience of
these stocks. Moreover, EO can offer valuable data regarding the fish habitat, encompassing a range of
parameters that help predict the presence or movement of fish at sea.
Key inputs for numerical modeling of fish stocks include global and regional data on sea temperature,
salinity, topography, ocean colour and ocean currents.
The integration of Artificial Intelligence algorithms with satellite imagery and other data sources
enhances the precision of estimates related to fish stock sizes and their precise locations. This fusion
of technologies contributes to the overall efficiency of fisheries, benefiting areas, such as navigation and
human resource management.
Digitalisation and modernisation of aquaculture farms and their control
Remote monitoring in the management of aquaculture facilities offers a range of advantages to various
stakeholders. Firstly, the technology provides investors, regulatory agencies and retailers with the
ability to closely track the growth of fish stocks. It also promotes transparency within the aquaculture
industry, addressing environmental concerns and fostering trust among stakeholders. Aquaculture
operations can also be optimised through the integration of EO and GNSS. This includes monitoring
water quality and issuing alerts, as well as addressing challenges such as algae blooms, for which
solutions like Hidromod (as presented at the 2022 UCP) are available.
EO can help monitor the performance of Recirculating Aquaculture Systems. These systems involve
the continuous purification and reuse of culture water, creating nearly closed-loop circuits. Examples
of such systems include Big Akwa and BioFishency EXL. Additionally, the Horizon Europe project
SmartAqua4FuturE (SAFE) contributes to advancements in this field. Finally, EO and GNSS
technologies are also adaptable to various aquaculture farm types, including those situated nearshore,
offshore, and on land, enabling efficient management and sustainability of aquaculture in diverse
settings.
2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Non-EU27 Europe North America
Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions
Fishing vessels navigation Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU) control
0
50
100
150
200
250
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
Fishing vessels navigation Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU) control
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE111EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
EO and Galileo differentiators support the growth and sustainability
of the blue economy
The annual revenue generated from the sale of both EO data and services to the fisheries sector is
projected to increase from almost €50 million in 2023 to almost €110 million by 2033.
Throughout the forecasted period, revenues for combating Illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU)
fishing are expected to dominate the market, achieving a 56% market share by the end of the decade.
Another foreseen significant market share is for aquaculture site selection. In 2023, this application
accounts for almost €10 million in revenue and is expected to grow to almost double that value in the
next 10 years. This could be a result of the increasing importance of aquaculture in recent key policies
and the overall projected increase in global food demand.
Galileo differentiators expected to play an increasing role in EU waters
An AIS serves as a vessel tracking system, transmitting vital information about a vessel's location,
behaviour and identity. However, vessel operators can manipulate their AIS, either by falsifying their
location or identity, an act commonly known as "spoofing“, or by deactivating their AIS entirely. While
legitimate reasons might exist for disabling an AIS device, it can also be exploited to conceal illicit activities.
To counteract this issue, Galileo has developed the Open Service Navigation Message Authentication
(OSNMA), an anti-spoofing service. OSNMA enables secure end-to-end data transmission from Galileo
satellites to GNSS receivers equipped with OSNMA capabilities.
By providing data authentication, the freely accessible Galileo OSNMA offers users assurance that
the Galileo navigation message they receive originates from the authentic system itself, free from any
alterations caused by a spoofing attempt (see Blue Porbeagle project on the next page). Furthermore,
the European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service (EGNOS) plays a pivotal role in monitoring
maritime operations and traffic, particularly when AIS equipment utilises SBAS corrections. Moreover,
EGNOS can prove instrumental in the concluding phase of search and rescue operations by furnishing
highly accurate location information, especially in cases where the beacon incorporates AIS capabilities.
Blue Carbon – EO aiding in the cultivation of carbon absorbing seaweed
Several varieties of seaweed, including kelp, have the remarkable capacity to absorb and store carbon
dioxide through sequestration. When kelp reaches the end of its life cycle, a significant portion of the
carbon dioxide it has captured becomes encapsulated within its tissues and subsequently sinks to the
ocean floor. Kelp's rapid growth compared to terrestrial forests provides it with a distinct advantage,
enabling it to sequester carbon at an accelerated pace. Various indices derived from EO data can be
used to map and monitor the growth of seaweed in conjunction with other monitoring activities
that involve field sampling and surveys. Additionally, EU4Algae, is a European led platform which
serves as a distinctive arena for cooperation among various stakeholders in the European algae sector.
It encompasses algae farmers, producers, distributors, consumers, technology innovators, business
support entities, investors, public authorities, academic institutions, researchers and non-governmental
organisations (NGOs).
A promising overall trend is the significant growth of the commercial seaweed farming sector in
recent years. This surge is propelled by mounting pressures on food and feed resources, the demand
for sustainable alternatives, and an enhanced comprehension of the distinctive attributes of seaweed.
These factors have sparked innovations, creating a wave of enthusiasm about the global potential of
seaweed, including from blue technology investors and accelerators such as Hatch Blue.
Fish stock detection and modelling Catch optimisation Aquaculture site selection
Aquaculture operations optimisation Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU) control
0
10
20
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
0
10
20
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application
Fish stock detection and modelling Catch optimisation
Aquaculture site selection Aquaculture operations optimisation
Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU) control
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application
112FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE
EUROPEAN SYSTEMS AND PROJECTS
Several European-funded projects utilise space data to develop innovative
solutions in fisheries and aquaculture
Next Generation of Fishing and Aquaculture Services - NextOcean
The NextOcean project is testing whether Copernicus and GEOSS data can be used by fishing
authorities to improve control over marine resources and by fishing companies to certify their
sustainability compliance by ecolabeling fish provenance. The data will also assist aquaculture
regulators in assessing the impact of fish farms. The project involved workshops and training sessions
to inform the broader community about the use of Earth Observation commercial services.
More information available at: https://www.nextocean.eu/
Fishery, Bivalves Mariculture and Oyster Ground Restoration - FORCOAST
The FORCOAST project developed, tested and demonstrated, in operational mode, novel Copernicus-
based downstream information services in the sectors of wild fisheries, oyster grounds restoration
and bivalve mariculture. The services integrated Copernicus EO Products with local models and other
diverse data sources (local, regional or global) with ICT (enhancing new frontiers opened by web, and
use of cloud). FORCOAST provided consistent coastal data products, based on a standardised data
processing scheme.
More information available at: https://forcoast.eu/
Breakthrough Applications for
Safety and Security - GAMBAS
The GAMBAS project showcased how
Galileo’s specific characteristics are essential
for fisheries. The project addressed three major
aspects of safety and security, namely piracy,
illegal fishing and maritime emergencies.
GAMBAS developed applications and
supported demonstrations at sea in Europe
and beyond.
More information available at:
https://gambasgsaproject.com/
Developing shipborne integrated
equipment - Blue Porbeagle
The goal of the project was to develop an
integrated on-board device, which, through the
pioneering use of dual-frequency technology
and an authentication-based spoofing
detection system using Galileo OSNMA,
enabled more precise and authenticated
positioning across Galileo-enabled receivers.
The project was a success and will give new
utility to the European Galileo satellites.
More information available at:
https://www.linkedin.com/showcase/blue-box-
porbeagle-vms
Current usage of EGNSS
Galileo enables essential positioning and navigation
capabilities to fishing vessels. AIS and VMS play
central roles when it comes to monitoring fishing
vessels and their activities. The new Very High
Frequency Data Exchange System (VDES),
expected to be operational in 2024, is a radio
communication system that operates between ships,
shore stations and satellites. The VDES is seen
as an effective and efficient use of radio spectrum,
building on the capabilities of AIS and addressing the
increasing requirements for data through the system.
This, in conjunction with the upcoming Open Service
Navigation Message Authentication (OSNMA), which
is designed to provide receivers with the assurance
that the received Galileo navigation message is coming
from the system itself, will bolster the efficiency and
effectiveness of vessel monitoring activities.
Search and
Rescue service
SAR Return
Link
More Robust
Positioning
Higher
Accuracy
More Robust
Timing
Authentication
Open Service
features
Multi-
frequency
EGNOS
GalileoGalileo
Current usage of Copernicus
The Copernicus Marine Environment Monitoring
Service (CMEMS) plays a crucial role in supporting
a wide range of applications relevant to the fisheries
and aquaculture segment, including fisheries
management, marine safety, climate monitoring
and environmental protection. The service integrates
data from various sources, including satellite
observations, in situ measurements, and models, to
provide comprehensive and up-to-date information
on the condition of the world's oceans. A related and
important product is MyOcean Viewer. This tool gives
users access to maps, charts and local time series
based on information generated by CMEMS. Most of
the measured parameters are updated daily and result
in a multitude of value-added services, primarily based
on the suitability indices for fishing and aquaculture
activities. Moreover, Under the Copernicus Security
Service (CSS), there is a service called the Copernicus
Maritime Surveillance Service (CMS) which is used by
EFCA for fisheries control.
Sentinels
Copernicus Services
Sentinel-1 Sentinel-2
Marine
(CMEMS)
Sentinel-3 Sentinel-6
Security
(CSS)
Terminology used on this page is explained in Annex 2 for both GNSS and EO performance parameters.
FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE113EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
REFERENCE CHARTS
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
Revenue from GNSS device sales by region Revenue from GNSS device sales by application
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
1 800
2 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
1 800
2 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Fishing vessels navigation Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU) control
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
Fishing vessels navigation Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU) control
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
1 800
2 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
1 800
2 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Fishing vessels navigation Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU) control
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
Fishing vessels navigation Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU) control
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
1 800
2 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
1 800
2 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Fishing vessels navigation Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU) control
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
Fishing vessels navigation Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU) control
250
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
1 800
2 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
1 800
2 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Fishing vessels navigation Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU) control
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
Fishing vessels navigation Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU) control
250
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
114FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE
REFERENCE CHARTS
Revenue from EO services sales by region
Revenue from EO data sales by region
2033
election
(IUU) control
election
(IUU) control
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
2033
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
Revenue from EO data sales by application
Revenue from EO services sales by application
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
Fish stock detection and modelling Catch optimisation Aquaculture site selection
Aquaculture operations optimisation Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU) control
Fish stock detection and modelling Catch optimisation Aquaculture site selection
Aquaculture operations optimisation Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU) control
€ (millions)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
€ (millions)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
Fish stock detection and modelling Catch optimisation Aquaculture site selection
Aquaculture operations optimisation Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU) control
Fish stock detection and modelling Catch optimisation Aquaculture site selection
Aquaculture operations optimisation Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU) control
€ (millions)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
€ (millions)
2033
election
(IUU) control
election
(IUU) control
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
2033
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
FORESTRY
115
FORESTRY
This chapter looks into various activities surrounding the cultivation, maintenance,
and development of forests, including recent developments, future trends and key
stakeholders across the sector. Given the vast sizes and often remote locations of many
forests, the use of EO and GNSS in the forestry sector is fast becoming a key enabler for
forestry managers to efficiently execute forestry operations and for governmental bodies
to monitor environmental impacts related to forestry activities.
EO allows for the remote monitoring and health assessment of forest inventories as
well as the detection of issues such as illegal logging and deforestation, an issue that
is becoming more and more critical as forest resources around the world become more
vulnerable.
GNSS, particularly when coupled with EO, allows for the execution of precision forestry
operations such as the guidance of machinery, the positioning and guidance of drones for
the likes of hyperspectral/lidar imaging or in precisely locating “on-tree” health sensors.
What you can read in this chapter
• Key trends: The new EU Forest Strategy for 2030, emerging online collaboration and
commerce platforms and the Forest Information System for Europe.
• Industry: Forestry value chains.
• Recent developments: Blockchain is supporting traceability applications and the future
of forest health monitoring utilises GNSS and EO.
• Future market evolution: Forestry operations optimised through better trafficability
and new forest regeneration efforts.
• European systems and projects: The European Space Programme supports R&D
activities in forestry.
• Reference charts: Yearly evolution of installed base of GNSS devices and revenues as
well as EO revenues by application and region.
© pexels.com
1 For Forest Inventory Monitoring and Forest
Machinery Guidance, shipments and installed
base of GNSS devices are quantified. In addition
to these quantified units, revenues (not units) from
Forest Asset Management services are quantified.
Application descriptions can be found in Annex 3.Environmental Monitoring
• Biomass monitoring
• Deforestation and degradation
monitoringOperations Management
• Automatic steering
• Forest asset management1
• Forest certification
• Forest machinery guidance 1Forest Resources Monitoring
• Forest Inventory monitoring1
• Forest vegetation health monitoring
• Illegal logging monitoringLegend
EO application
GNSS application
Synergetic application
(combined use of EO and GNSS)
116FORESTRY
KEY TRENDS
New EU Forestry Strategy for 2030 and Deforestation-Free Products
Regulation driving how the sector will reach the goals of the Green Deal
The new EU Forestry Strategy for 2030 outlines a comprehensive vision to enhance both the quantity
and quality of European forests while reinforcing their protection, restoration and resilience. Its primary
objective is to adapt these forests to the changing environmental conditions, including extreme weather
events and heightened uncertainty due to climate change. The integration of EO data, coupled
with Artificial Intelligence and advanced big data analytics, leveraging the capabilities of cloud
computing, introduces objectivity and transparency to the evaluation of the strategy's effectiveness.
Additionally, in 2023, the European Parliament passed a ground-breaking law aimed at combatting
global deforestation, known as the Deforestation-Free Products Regulation (EUDR). This regulation
establishes mandatory due diligence requirements for all operators and traders involved in the import,
distribution or export of various commodities within the EU market, including soy, beef, palm oil, cocoa,
coffee, rubber and timber, along with derived products, such as furniture and printed paper. To enforce
this law, EU authorities will now use company-provided information such as GNSS-enabled coordinates
of land plots where commodities are produced, EO-based deforestation analysis or complementary data
(e.g. geotagged photographs). They will also conduct thorough inspections utilising satellite monitoring
tools and DNA analysis, ensuring that the commodities in question do not originate from deforested
areas.
E-commerce platforms connecting forestry value chain actors like never before
A burgeoning category of digital business solutions within the forestry industry comprises specialised
IT platforms designed to facilitate e-commerce. These platforms enable seamless collaboration among
various stakeholders within the forestry supply chain, including forest managers, harvesting contractors,
transportation companies, timber traders and forest-based industries. By harnessing technologies such
as GNSS data to record wood pile locations and track their movement for logistical purposes, as well
as EO data for monitoring and optimising forestry operations, logistics platforms empower actors to
enhance their planning horizons and optimise supply chain operations across different companies.
Some of these systems provide comprehensive solutions that cover the full spectrum of forestry-related
activities and can seamlessly integrate with commonly used IT systems. In recent years, e-business
platforms have witnessed widespread adoption in the forestry sector. Numerous instances of online
marketplaces for timber and forestry services have emerged, fostering business partnerships and
facilitating transactions, particularly in rural areas.
The Forest Information System for Europe (FISE) – our most comprehensive
source for forest monitoring
The Forest Information System for Europe (FISE) stands as the pioneering centralised database
for forest-related information across Europe. Through its web portal, FISE offers customised data
and insights to a diverse audience, including national, EU and international policymakers, forest
industry experts, forest owners and conservationists, as well as scientists and researchers. FISE also
extensively leverages data and information sourced from the Copernicus programme. Beyond enhancing
forest monitoring capabilities, FISE is poised to foster data-driven decision-making in forestry. Its
implementation is anticipated to bolster public trust in forest management, curb illicit logging activities,
promote and incentivise sustainable forest management practices, and provide support for forests'
adaptation to the challenges posed by climate change. Furthermore, FISE contributes to shaping a
digitally advanced Europe by empowering individuals, businesses and administrations with access
to standardised forest-related data and by harnessing digital technologies to their fullest potential.
Finally, a legislative proposal has been drawn up under the new Forest Strategy for 2030 to create a
framework for ensuring coordinated EU forest observation, reporting and data collection, within which
FISE could play a central role. The monitoring framework will enable the collection and sharing of timely
and comparable forest data obtained through a combination of EO and ground measurements. It will
also ensure cooperation among Member States by encouraging them to set up long-term forest plans.
The new EU Forest Strategy for 2030, emerging online collaboration
and commerce platforms and the Forest Information System for Europe
Key market trends
• The new EU Forest Strategy for 2030 and Deforestation-Free Products Regulation will guide how we monitor and manage forestry for years to come
• New digital platforms utilising GNSS and EO to increase collaboration across the forestry value chain
• The Forest Information System for Europe is our most comprehensive source of data on European forests
© pexels.com
FORESTRY117EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
INDUSTRY
SEARCH AND RESCUE
BEACON USERS END USERS
SYSTEM INTEGRATORS
DESIGN CONSULTANCIES
TESTING & MAINTENANCE
• AGJUNCTION
• AL-GHAZI TRACTORS
• AMAZONEN-WERKE*
• BARKO
• C-ASTRAL
• CATERPILLAR INC
• CLAAS KGAA*
• CHCNAV
• CNH INDUSTRIAL*
• DELAIR*
• DEERE
• DUSITECH
• HEXAGON*
• HITACHI
• JCB*
• KOMATSU*
• KUBOTA CORPORATION*
• LINDNER TRAKTOREN*
• MILLAT TRACTORS
• QIANXUN SI
• SDF GROUP*
• TEEJET TECHNOLOGIES*
• VOLVO*
• YANMAR
• ENVIRONMENTAL AGENCIES
• FORESTRY CONSULTANTS
• FORESTRY MANAGERS
• FORESTRY-INSURERS
• INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES (E.G.
FAO, WFP…)
• LOGGING COMPANIES
• MACHINE MANUFACTURERS
• PAYING AGENCIES
Forestry Value Chains1
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in GNSS and EO
downstream activities. Please note that enterprises listed in the data providers step of the value chain
often provide platforms as a service. For the sake of simplicity the data providers are not repeated in
other stages of the value chain in which they are active.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 13 and 23 for a comprehensive description of value chains and how to interpret
them at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the company,
though the actual area of activity might be wider.
END USERS
INFORMATION
PROVIDERS
EO PRODUCTS
AND SERVICE
PROVIDERS
PLATFORM
PROVIDERS
INFRASTRUCTURE
PROVIDERS
DATA PROVIDERS
• AG LEADER TECHNOLOGY
• AGJUNCTION
• ANALOG DEVICES
• ANTCOM
• ARAG*
• AVMAP*
• BEIJING BDSTAR NAVIGATION
• CAMPBELL SCIENTIFIC
• CHCNAV
• CNH INDUSTRIAL*
• COMNAV TECHNOLOGY
• DEERE
• HARXON
• HEXAGON*
• MEINBERG*
• RAVEN INDUSTRIES
• SEPTENTRIO*
• TOPCON CORPORATION
• TRIMBLE NAVIGATION
• UNISTRONG GNSS
• YAGEO
• AIRBUS*
• BLACKSKY
• CAPELLA SPACE
• CONSTELLR*
• GEOSAT*
• ICEYE*
• E-GEOS*
• MAXAR
• PLANET
• SATELLOGIC*
• UMBRA
• AWS
• CLOUDFERRO*
• GOOGLE CLOUD PLATFORM
• IBM CLOUD
• MICROSOFT AZURE
• T-SYSTEMS*
• CLOUDEO*
• CREODIAS*
• EARTH-I*
• PIESAT
• PLANET EXPLORER
• SENTINEL HUB* (SINERGISE)
• SPACESENSE*
• TERRADUE*
• UP42*
• VITO*
• COLLECTIVE CRUNCH*
• F&W
• FORESTRADAR*
• FORLIANCE*
• FORSTIFY*
• KANOP*
• KUVA SPACE*
• NIRAS ALECTIA FONDEN*
• OIKON*
• SYMBIA SOLUTIONS*
• TREEMETRICS*
• WUUDIS*
• ENVIRONMENTAL AGENCIES
• FORESTRY CONSULTANTS
• FORESTRY MANAGERS
• FORESTRY-INSURERS
• INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES (E.G.
FAO, WFP…)
• MACHINE MANUFACTURERS
• PAYING AGENCIES
• FOREST CERTIFICATION BODIES
• FOOD/INDUSTRAL
MANUFACTURING COMPANIES
CONCERNED WITH
DEFORESTATION-FREE PRODUCTS
EARTH
OBSERVATION
AUGMENTATION
SERVICE PROVIDERS
COMPONENT
AND RECEIVER
MANUFACTURERS
GNSS
• COPERNICUS SENTINELS*
• LANDSAT (USGS)
• METEOSAT (EUMETSAT)*
• RADARSAT (CSA)
• RELEVANT EUROPEAN NATIONAL
MISSIONS
• RELEVANT IN-SITU NETWORKS
• FEDERATED INFRASTRUCTURE
(E.G. GAIA-X)*
• SENTINEL COLLABORATIVE
GROUND SEGMENT*
• CNH INDUSTRIAL*
• DEERE
• HEMISPHERE (ATLAS)
• HEXAGON*
• SAPCORDA*
• SWIFT
• TERIA*
• TOPCON
• TRIMBLE
• NATIONAL AND REGIONAL RTK
NETWORK PROVIDERS
• COPERNICUS DATA SPACE
ECOSYSTEM*
• FORESTRY TEP*
• GLOBAL FOREST WATCH
• WEKEO*
• EU OBSERVATORY ON
DEFORESTATION AND FOREST
DEGRADATION*
• ARBONAUT*
• BEETLEFORTECH*
• CGI INC
• CONSTELLR*
• DAVEY TREE EXPERT COMPANY
• EARTH DAILY
• EOS DATA ANALYTICS
• ECOMETRICA*
• GAF*
• GEOVILLE*
• GMV*
• KAYRROS*
• KERMAP*
• KSAT*
• LIVEEO*
• METRIA*
• ORBIFY*
• ROSA.IO*
• SATELLIGENCE*
• SINERGISE
• SITOWISE*
• SPACEBEL*
• TERRAEYE*
• VITO*
• XYLENE*
• COPERNICUS CLIMATE CHANGE
SERVICE (C3S)*
• COPERNICUS EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT SERVICE (CEMS)*
• COPERNICUS LAND MONITORING
SERVICE (CLMS)*
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
European2 EO and GNSS
industry in the global arena
With Airbus, Leonardo (e-GEOS), and
KSAT leading the segment for Europe,
European companies constitute almost
half of the global EO data processing,
analysis, insights and decision support
market.
GNSS receivers in Forestry are similar
to those used in Agriculture, with a
significant overlap in terms of industry.
European companies such as Hexagon
and CNH are among the top 10 global
companies when it comes to components
and receivers manufacturing, holding
almost one sixth of the market share
combined.
118FORESTRY
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Blockchain is supporting traceability applications and the future of forest
health monitoring utilises GNSS and EO
The shipments of GNSS receivers over the past 10 years has shown fluctuating and overall, little
growth. While there was a hopeful growth trend leading up to 2016, overall shipment numbers
ultimately declined since then and now stand roughly at the same point as they did a decade ago.
Forest Machinery Guidance held the largest market share over the past decade. Forest Inventory
Monitoring uses GNSS for accurately locating inventory plots during operations. The application used
to be supported by dedicated handheld devices, but has progressively transitioned towards the use of
specific software empowering tablets
and smartphones.
EO is also extensively used in this
application to first classify and then
analyse forested areas to produce
estimates on the number of trees
in a defined area. Forest Inventory
Monitoring lost almost all of its market
share to Forest Machinery Guidance,
dwindling to a small percentage at
the end of the decade in question.
This decline could be attributed to a
number of factors, such EO being used
more and more in lieu of GNSS within
this application and the growing use of
smartphones instead of conventional
GNSS-enabled devices.
EO and blockchain increasing forestry traceability
A pressing concern within the forestry industry pertains to the infiltration of illegal logging products
into the supply chain, perpetuating the existence of these detrimental practices. Consequently, the
destruction of forests, jungles and habitats ensues, with far-reaching and devastating consequences for
indigenous communities.
To address this issue, one promising solution involves the utilisation of blockchain, a type of
distributed ledger technology. During the logging process, the precise location of each tree can be
automatically recorded in the blockchain and an intelligent tag can be affixed to track the wood's journey
throughout the entire supply network, all of which can be aided through the adoption of GNSS data. This
robust system ensures the secure traceability of wood origins, effectively mitigating concerns related to
the authenticity of wood and other natural resource supply chains. Additionally, blockchain facilitates
real-time tracking and auditing of timber, enhancing transparency and accountability in the industry.
More accurate forest health monitoring
Tree monitoring systems offer a means for authorities to maintain a vigilant watch over the well-
being of forests. Foresters can affix sensors to selected trees within woodland areas, enabling the
measurement of various parameters that serve as indicators of tree health. This practice enables
both foresters and community stakeholders to take decisions based on reliable data, whether the goal
is to preserve existing tree cover or expand into urban and forested areas. These sensors are capable of
capturing eco-physiological and biological data, including such details as water transport within trees,
stem water content, diameter growth, and the quality and quantity of tree foliage.
To precisely pinpoint tree locations, GNSS technology is employed, aiding foresters in obtaining a
comprehensive assessment of overall forest health. Furthermore, EO data, encompassing resources
like Copernicus Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2 data, complements sensor data by providing insights into the
overall canopy health through various derived indices. EO technology extends its monitoring capabilities
to aspects such as soil conditions and forest cover, offering a holistic view of a forest's health status.
500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (th
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (tho
Forest asset management Forest machinery guidance Forest Inventory monitoring
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
Forest machinery guidance Forest Inventory monitoring
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
© pexels.com
FORESTRY119EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
Forestry operations optimised through better trafficability and new forest
regeneration efforts
Total revenues from EO data and services sales
are expected to show strong and continuous
growth over the next 10 years, reaching over
€300 m by the end of the decade.
North America is expected to retain a dominant
market share from both the sales of EO data
and services over the coming decade, reaching
€140 m by 2033.
Over the next decade, the Asia Pacific region
is poised to significantly increase its market
presence, surpassing that of the EU27.
Likewise, Latin America will gradually but
consistently expand its market share, thanks
to the continued significance of forestry-
related activities in the Amazon. Its overall
market share, however, will remain comparable
to other parts of the world.
Forest “trafficability” – Optimising navigation and forestry operations in all
weather conditions with EO
Heavy machinery used in forest harvesting operations can result in significant soil rutting, which is
detrimental to the growth of forests. The extent of rutting risks is contingent upon the soil's bearing
capacity, which exhibits substantial spatial and temporal variability. It is imperative to predict the
trafficability of forested areas when selecting suitable operation sites within specific timeframes and
under varying conditions.
Additionally, on-site route optimisation during operations necessitates the use of integrated tools to
minimise adverse ecological and economic impacts. To accomplish these objectives, the integration
of various tools is essential for the effective planning and execution of forest operations. EO-enabled
mapping and seasonal forecasting play pivotal roles in predicting factors such as frozen soil depth,
snow accumulation and moisture content. This valuable information empowers forestry operators to
identify areas with the most favorable soil conditions well in advance, facilitating more efficient planning
and ensuring optimal forest trafficability conditions.
Advanced regeneration efforts aiming to encourage new forest growth
Cutting-edge solutions for forest regeneration are playing a pivotal role in advancing sustainable forest
yields. A diverse array of technology-driven approaches is now at our disposal. These solutions harness
the power of GNSS and EO data, in conjunction with advanced analytics and Artificial Intelligence, to
achieve objectives including enhancing seedling dispersal, optimising nutrient allocation and predicting
yield outcomes.
Precision forestry machinery guided by GNSS technology, including the use of unmanned robotic
systems, showcases remarkable capabilities. It can meticulously plant hundreds of thousands of seeds
in a single day. Some technologies go even further by packaging seeds into precisely balanced fertiliser
mixes and dispensing them automatically – a task that easily surpasses the capacity of a human labourer
within the same timeframe. Furthermore, a plethora of indices derived from resources like Copernicus
Sentinel-1, Sentinel-2, and the Copernicus Land Monitoring Service (CLMS) provides invaluable
data and services that can be employed for remote monitoring of forest growth progress and health
assessment.
ing
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
© pexels.com
120FORESTRY
EUROPEAN SYSTEMS AND PROJECTS
Current usage of Copernicus
Forest monitoring applications can benefit
greatly from Copernicus data and services.
The programme offers dedicated services for
land monitoring (i.e. the Copernicus Land
Monitoring Service, (CLMS)), which includes
the Tree Cover Density (TCD), Dominant Leaf
Type (DLT) and Forest Type (FTY) products.
Additional services include the Copernicus
Climate Change Service (C3S) and, specifically
concerning forest fires, the Copernicus
Emergency Management Service (CEMS).
The programme also supplies satellite data
from the Sentinels, which are seamlessly
integrated into numerous forest monitoring
and management applications, such as in
deforestation monitoring.
Current usage of EGNSS
Galileo provides highly accurate real-time
positioning and navigation information, which
allows forestry professionals to precisely
locate and map forest areas, boundaries, roads
and trails. The Galileo High Accuracy Service
(HAS) went live in 2023, offering greater
accuracy than 20cm horizontally and 40cm
vertically, free of charge. Accurate positioning
is essential for tasks such as machinery
guidance, planning tree planting,
authenticating plot sizes/positions to track
deforestation rates, or identifying specific
areas for timber harvesting. Moreover, the
Open Service Navigation Message Authentication (OSNMA) provides receivers with the
assurance that the received Galileo navigation message is coming from the system itself and
has not been modified.
The real-time data allows forestry managers to monitor and track moving assets within
the forest, such as vehicles or personnel, which enhances safety and efficiency. The
combination of precise positioning and real-time data also enables the use of advanced
technologies like remote sensing and aerial imagery to be integrated with the positioning
data to create detailed forest inventory maps.
Sentinels
Sentinel-1 Sentinel-2
Copernicus Services
Climate Change
(C3S)
Emergency
(CEMS)
Land
(CLMS)
Greater
Availability
Greater
Continuity
Higher
Accuracy
More Robust
Positioning
High accuracy
service
Authentication
features
Open Service
Galileo Galileo
Multi-
frequency
EGNOS
The European Space Programme supports R&D activities in forestry
Satellites for wilderness inspection and forest threat tracking - SWIFTT
SWIFTT will provide forest managers with affordable, simple and effective remote sensing tools
backed up by Copernicus satellite imagery and powerful machine learning models to help monitor and
manage forest risks.
It will enable forest managers to adapt to climate change with affordable, simple and effective remote
sensing tools backed up by machine learning models. This solution will be tested in real conditions.
More information available at: https://swiftt.eu/
Digital analytics and robotics for sustainable forestry - Digiforest
The mission of Digiforest is to develop the technology needed to achieve sustainable digital forestry.
It brings together partners working on GNSS-enabled aerial robots, walking robots, autonomous
(lightweight) harvesters, as well as forestry decision-makers and commercial companies.
These stakeholders aim to create a full data pipeline to digitise the state of forests (at scale) and to
collect maps and inventories which can be used by foresters in more precise, sustainable and modern
ways.
More information available at: https://digiforest.eu/
Terminology used on this page is explained in Annex 2 for both GNSS and EO performance parameters.
Sentinel-3
Horizon Europe,
a programme of the
European Union
Horizon Europe,
a programme of the
European Union
FORESTRY121EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
REFERENCE CHARTS
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
Revenue from GNSS device sales and services by region Revenue from GNSS device sales and services by application
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (thousands)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Forest machinery guidance Forest Inventory monitoring
0
500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (thousands)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by application
Forest asset management Forest machinery guidance Forest Inventory monitoring
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (thousands)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Forest machinery guidance Forest Inventory monitoring
0
500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (thousands)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by application
Forest asset management Forest machinery guidance Forest Inventory monitoring
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (thousands)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Forest machinery guidance Forest Inventory monitoring
0
500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (thousands)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by application
Forest asset management Forest machinery guidance Forest Inventory monitoring
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (thousands)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Forest machinery guidance Forest Inventory monitoring
0
500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (thousands)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by application
Forest asset management Forest machinery guidance Forest Inventory monitoring
122FORESTRY
REFERENCE CHARTS
Revenue from EO data sales by application
Revenue from EO services sales by application
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
Illegal logging monitoring Forest inventory monitoring Forest vegetation health monitoring
Forest certification Biomass monitoring
Illegal logging monitoring Forest inventory monitoring Forest vegetation health monitoring
Forest certification Biomass monitoring
Revenue from EO services sales by region
Revenue from EO data sales by region
2033
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
2033
onitoring
onitoring
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
033
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
2033
onitoring
onitoring
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
Illegal logging monitoring Forest inventory monitoring Forest vegetation health monitoring
Forest certification Biomass monitoring
Illegal logging monitoring Forest inventory monitoring Forest vegetation health monitoring
Forest certification Biomass monitoring
INFRASTRUCTURE
123
INFRASTRUCTURE
GNSS and EO are invaluable assets in the toolbox of construction companies,
infrastructure managers, public authorities and utility operators.
By integrating receivers into heavy machinery or drones, GNSS offers high-accuracy
services which support the various phases of the infrastructure life cycle, including
construction works and maintenance operations. In addition, GNSS-based timing and
synchronisation improves the protection and resilience of telecommunication networks,
data centres, cloud services and state-of-the-art industrial production systems.
Satellite-based imagery also supports the entire infrastructure life cycle, from initial
site selection to the monitoring of construction and post-construction operations. It
contributes to the characterisation of potential construction sites and to the monitoring
of construction operations and of their impacts on the environment. Thanks to its capacity
to deliver information on risk exposure and future impacts of climate change, EO also
enables to design more resilient infrastructure and to optimise maintenance operations.
Whatever the type of infrastructure (e.g. buildings, bridges, roads, railway lines, pipelines,
dams, factories, power plants, telecommunication networks, data centres), GNSS and
EO support the actors involved in infrastructure management in their effort to increase
the safety of operations and productivity, while improving infrastructure resilience and
safeguarding the environment.
What you can read in this chapter
• Key trends: Space-based services increasingly support the planning, design and
management of resilient infrastructure.
• User perspective: GNSS and EO help optimise construction operations and monitor
their impact on the environment.
• Industry: Infrastructure Value Chains.
• Recent developments: GNSS positioning and timing power robust solutions in the
infrastructure sector while EO-based construction progress monitoring and ground
deformation monitoring are on the rise.
• Future market evolution: New constellations and applications contribute to the growth
of the GNSS market and the penetration of EO-based solutions should benefit from
state-of-the-art data computing technologies.
• European systems: The EU Space Programme provides invaluable benefits for
infrastructure.
• European Projects: Several EU-funded projects investigate solutions to improve
infrastructure resilience.
• Reference charts: Yearly evolution of the installed base of GNSS devices and revenues
as well as EO revenues by application and region.
© iStock
Application descriptions can be found in Annex 3.Timing & Synchronisation of
Telecommunication Networks
• Data Centre
• Digital Cellular Network (DCN)
• DTV Broadcast
• Professional Mobile Radio (PMR)
• Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)
• Satellite Communication (SATCOM
• Small CellsEnvironmental Impact Monitoring
• Environmental impact assessment
of infrastructureInfrastructure Planning
• Infrastructure Site Selection and Planning
• Permitting
• Vulnerability AnalysisInfrastructure Construction
and Monitoring
• Construction Monitoring
• Monitoring of impact of human activities
on infrastructure
• Official Development Assistance (ODA)
Support Monitoring
• Pipeline Monitoring
• Post-Construction MonitoringLegend
EO application
GNSS application
Synergetic application
(combined use of EO and GNSS)
124INFRASTRUCTURE
KEY TRENDS
GNSS-based positioning supports inspection and preventive maintenance operations
The inspection of large or remote infrastructure can be a costly endeavour,
particularly when considering predictive or preventive maintenance efforts
to avoid potential disruptions. Regular inspections are crucial for identifying
and addressing issues before they escalate. In this context, autonomous
devices, such as drones, have emerged as a cost-effective and versatile
alternative for performing both inspection and maintenance tasks.
These devices come equipped with an array of sensors, cameras, and
specialised tools that enable comprehensive assessments of infrastructure.
Their capacity to integrate GNSS receivers is ensuring precise positioning and mapping along
the length and breadth of the infrastructure under examination. Not only does it facilitate accurate
navigation, but it also allows for the creation of highly detailed maps, greatly enhancing the accuracy
and comprehensiveness of inspections.
Such autonomous devices can further enhance their utility through the incorporation of authentication
features, adding an extra layer of trust and reliability, and ensuring that the devices can be safely
deployed in various operational settings including sensitive or critical infrastructure environments.
EO helps infrastructure planners and managers to mitigate threats from
climate change
Due to their long life cycle (generally several decades), most types of infrastructure are strongly exposed
to the negative impacts of climate change. Whether it is local infrastructure, such as buildings, airports
or bridges, or infrastructure extending over large areas, such as road networks, railway lines or pipelines,
the intensification of extreme weather events (e.g. heat waves, droughts, storms, floods) is putting at
risk both their structural health and in some cases the continuity of operations.
In this context, building resilient infrastructure is a necessity but is challenging. It requires in particular
that the surrounding environmental conditions and their evolution in the long-term are known and taken
into account since the early phases of infrastructure planning. In this domain, EO brings a significant
added-value to infrastructure planners and managers. In particular, it provides long time series of
observation data that help model the evolution of climate conditions (e.g. average temperatures,
water level) and to quantify the exposure to natural threats of the various sites.
Thus, EO can help managers to optimise the planning and definition of maintenance operations for
existing infrastructure. For new projects, EO can support site selection and contribute to informed
decisions with regard to the design of resilient constructions.
GNSS T&S capacities coupled with cybersecurity tools can provide a secure
environment for data centres and cloud services
The ongoing transition to cloud-based environments, hybrid cloud networks and interconnected data
centres is posing new challenges to companies in the form of increased cyber risks as well as GNSS-
related threats such as jamming and spoofing. Fortunately, GNSS itself is part of the hybrid solution
to mitigate these threats.
To monitor and control their own security architectures as well as to mitigate both challenges, large
enterprises deem it essential to rely on so-called Security Operation Centres (SOCs). These SOCs
rely on a vast amount of properly timed and synchronised logs, with a single time source, to ensure
continuity of operations, automation, threat detection and support
analytical tools.
State-of-the-art dual-frequency receivers and protected GNSS
signals such as Galileo OSNMA can form a first stage of a resilient
PNT environment (detection). Besides the use of GNSS hardware,
the huge amount of GNSS PNT data available in the cloud allows for
a processing using AI techniques and machine learning algorithms
to derive meaningful information to mitigate GNSS threats.
InSAR-based ground deformation monitoring is becoming increasingly popular
in the infrastructure sector
Among the multiple risks infrastructure is exposed to, ground deformation is certainly considered by
infrastructure managers as a major threat since it can cause severe damage to buildings.
Several in situ means already exist to measure ground deformations but the technique known as
Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) is becoming increasingly used in the infrastructure
sector. Thanks to its capacity to detect millimetric ground deformations from space over large areas, to
observe seasonal ground deformations and to identify deformation trends (e.g. subsidence) over time,
InSAR supports the various phases of the infrastructure life cycle.
During the infrastructure planning phase, InSAR helps characterise potential sites through the provision of
ground deformation risk mapping. During construction operations, InSAR enables large-scale monitoring
of the surroundings and the detection of ground deformations that would be caused by the construction
works (e.g. in case of tunnelling activities). Concerning post-construction monitoring, the global nature
of InSAR makes it particularly well fitted to the monitoring of linear infrastructure such as rail and road
networks, electric lines or pipelines. The size of these types of infrastructure generally makes their monitoring
costly and challenging when done with in situ means. InSAR enables the optimisation of maintenance
operations by identifying zones at risk that need to be monitored with additional on-site equipment.
Space-based services increasingly support the planning, design
and management of resilient infrastructure
Key market trends
• Climate neutrality goals, UN SDGs and climate change mitigation foster the use of EO data for informed decisions related to the design of resilient infrastructure and its maintenance
• The EU Space Programme, along with GIS and cutting-edge AI technologies, supports the automation of monitoring processes and the optimisation of construction and maintenance operations
• EGNSS is expected to play a key role in satisfying the growing needs of the industry and critical infrastructure for robust and threat-resistant timing and synchronisation solutions
• InSAR ground deformation assessment is progressively generalising for large infrastructure works while satellite-based change detection is increasingly used for construction progress monitoring
© iStock
© iStock
INFRASTRUCTURE125EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
USER PERSPECTIVE
Sources of key EO and GNSS user requirements
The key EO and GNSS user requirements for the different application
groups within the infrastructure segment are, at EU level, collected
using a harmonised procedure.
Information is collected through extensive interactions with user
groups, providers and experts in a continuous process culminating
at the User Consultation Platforms (UCP). All relevant requirements
are documented in detail and updated regularly within the Report on
Infrastructure. User requirements for EO services and products – as
well as their evolution – are now also collected through the UCP. The
process covers the EO user needs and requirements of commercial
users based on inputs from industry experts and user groups, mirroring
the existing process implemented for GNSS.
Moreover, the collection of specific requirements for Copernicus
services and products is supported by an integrated process that
involves different channels: (i) dedicated studies (e.g. "NEXTSPACE"
project, "Copernicus for EC (C4EC)" study, Commission Staff Working
Document on user needs); (ii) targeted consultations organised by
the European Commission or the Entrusted entities with the relevant
communities; and (iii) regular and structured exchanges among
representatives of the Copernicus governance structure and Member
States through the Copernicus User Forum.
GNSS and EO help optimise construction operations and monitor
their impact on the environment
EO offers a cost-effective solution to monitor the impact of large construction works on their environment
The permanent transformation of large cities involves construction works taking place over large and densely populated urban areas. The
"Grand Paris Express", a public transport infrastructure project which foresees the construction of four new automated metro lines and the extension
of two existing ones in the Paris suburban area, along with "Westconnex", a 33 km motorway tunnelling project in Sydney’s urban area, perfectly
illustrate the modernisation of urban areas and the challenges it poses.
Both for economic and political reasons, the implementation of such projects must not be detrimental to the well-being of the people living in the
concerned areas. Yet, because of the dense urban environment, these projects often require underground construction activities which may cause
damage to buildings located in their vicinity due to the ground deformations they may induce.
It is therefore extremely important for local authorities, infrastructure managers and construction companies to monitor the impact on the environment
of construction activities. However, when taking place over large areas and implemented with in situ inspections and conventional means, such a
monitoring is very resource-consuming. With InSAR-based ground deformation monitoring, EO provides the abovementioned stakeholders with
a large-scale and cost-effective solution enabling them to achieve their objectives while optimising the use of conventional means.
In the longer term, public authorities and infrastructure managers need to better understand the impact of new infrastructure on their environment. Beyond the construction phase, EO can also support the
identification and monitoring of the environmental and socio-economic impacts of large infrastructure (e.g. public transport, stadiums, large commercial areas, airports and harbours) on their environment.
Indeed, when combined with other data in geographic information systems, satellite-based observations can contribute to the assessment of indicators, such as population evolution patterns, degradation of
green areas, evolution of the built environment and intensity of economic activities, which can help the various actors to better understand these impacts.
Increased integration of GNSS with other technologies enables automation,
enhanced safety, and sustainability
In construction, ensuring the safety of personnel and third parties while enhancing efficiency
and precision is paramount. One valuable tool for achieving these goals is GNSS technology,
which is seamlessly integrated into construction equipment and systems, including machine
control and Building Information Modelling (BIM). This integration enables greater automation
of construction processes, such as grading, excavation, and site preparation, resulting in improved
efficiency and accuracy.
GNSS information also allows site managers and operators to monitor equipment location,
movement and performance, facilitating the optimisation of workflows and enhancing security.
By defining designated areas, the risk of accidents can be reduced, further bolstering site safety.
Moreover, optimising construction
processes not only streamlines
operations but also minimises
fuel consumption and emissions,
thereby mitigating the environmental
impact associated with construction
activities. In essence, the incorporation
of GNSS in construction practices
contributes to safer, more efficient
and environmentally conscious
construction processes.
© iStock
© TRE ALTAMIRA © DLR e.V. 2015-2020 and
© Airbus Defense and Space GmbH
126INFRASTRUCTURE
INDUSTRY
• HEMISPHERE (ATLAS)
• HEXAGON (LEICA
GEOSYSTEMS,
NOVATEL)*
• SAPCORDA*
• SPACEOPAL*
• SWIFT
• TERIA*
• TOPCON
• TRIMBLE
Construction
• BEIJING BDSTAR
NAVIGATION
• FURUNO
• HEXAGON*
• SEPTENTRIO*
• STMICROELECTRONICS*
• TAI-SAW TECHNOLOGY
• TRIMBLE NAVIGATION
• U-BLOX*
• YAGEO CORPORATION
Timing & Synchronisation
• COMNAV TECHNOLOGY
• FURUNO
• MICROCHIP TECHNOLOGY
• NIHON DENGYO KOSAKU
• QORVO
• SCHNEIDER ELECTRIC*
• SEIKO EPSON
• SEPTENTRIO*
• STMICROELECTRONICS*
Construction
• AB VOLVO*
• CATERPILLAR
• CNH INDUSTRIAL*
• DEERE
• HEXAGON*
• J.C.B. SERVICE*
• KOMATSU
• KONGSBERG SATELLITE SERVICES*
Timing & Synchronisation
• ABB*
• ACCENTURE
• CHRONOS TECHNOLOGY*
• EATON*
• ERICSSON*
• HUAWEI
• JUNIPER
• KERLINK*
• NOKIA*
• SICE*
• ZTE
Construction
• BEIJING UNISTRONG SCIENCE
& TECHNOLOGY
• HEXAGON*
• KONGSBERG MARITIME*
• TOPCON CORPORATION
• TRIMBLE NAVIGATION
Timing & Synchronisation
• CAMPBELL SCIENTIFIC
• CHRONOS TECHNOLOGY*
• ELPROMA*
• GORGY TIMING*
• HEXAGON*
• HOPF ELEKTRONIK*
• MEINBERG*
• MICROCHIP
• OMICRON*
• OSCILLOQUARTZ*
• SAFRAN TRUSTED 4D*
• SEIKO
• SEPTENTRIO*
• STMICROELECTRONICS*
• TIMELINK*
• U-BLOX*
• CONSTRUCTION COMPANIES
• ENGINEERS
• PIPELINE OPERATORS
• REGULATING AUTHORITIES
• TELECOM OPERATORS
• NATIONAL AND
REGIONAL RTK
NETWORK PROVIDERS
AUGMENTATION
SERVICE PROVIDERS
COMPONENT
MANUFACTURERS RECEIVER MANUFACTURERS USERS
SYSTEM INTEGRATORS
DESIGN CONSULTANCIES
TESTING & MAINTENANCE
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in GNSS downstream activities.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 23 for a comprehensive description of the GNSS value chain and how to interpret them at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the company, though the actual area of activity might be wider.
Infrastructure GNSS Value Chain1
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
European2 GNSS industry in the global arena
As evident from the value chain, the use of GNSS for infrastructure can be split in
two different use cases. On the one hand, there are receivers related to construction
applications, and on the other hand, receivers for the timing and synchronisation
of telecommunications networks. As far as construction is concerned, some of the
leading companies in Europe are Hexagon and Kongsberg Maritime.
Regarding timing and synchronisation, notable European receiver manufacturers
include STMicroelectronics, Safran Trusted 4D, U-Blox, Oscilloquartz and
Meinberg.
GNSS
INFRASTRUCTURE127EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
INDUSTRY
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in EO downstream activities. Please note that enterprises listed in the data providers
step of the value chain often provide platforms as a service. For the sake of simplicity the data providers are not repeated in other stages of the value chain in which they are active.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 13 for a comprehensive description of the EO value chain and how to interpret them at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the company, though the actual area of activity might be wider.
Infrastructure EO Value Chain 1
END USERS
INFORMATION
PROVIDERS
EO PRODUCTS
AND SERVICE
PROVIDERS
PLATFORM
PROVIDERS
INFRASTRUCTURE
PROVIDERS
DATA PROVIDERS
• 21AT
• AIRBUS*
• AXELSPACE
• BLACKSKY
• CAPELLA SPACE
• CGSTL
• EARTHDAILY
• E-GEOS*
• GEOCENTO*
• GEOIMAGE
• ICEYE*
• MAXAR
• ORBITA AEROSPACE
• PLANET
• SATELLOGIC
• UMBRA
• AWS
• CLOUDFERRO*
• GOOGLE CLOUD
PLATFORM
• IBM CLOUD
• MICROSOFT AZURE
• T-SYSTEMS*
• CLOUDEO*
• CREODIAS*
• EARTH-I*
• EURODATACUBE*
• EXOLABS*
• NORTH.IO*
• OPEN DATA CUBE
• PICTERRA*
• SENTINEL HUB*
(SINERGISE)
• 3DEO*
• C-CORE
• CLS*
• DETEKTIA*
• E-GEOS*
• EXOLABS*
• GEO4I*
• GAF*
• GEOFEM*
• GEOVILLE*
• HYDROSAT
• INSAR.SK*
• KSAT*
• ORBITAL EYE*
• PIXSTART*
• PLANETEK*
• SATSURE
• SKYGEO
• SPACESUR
• SPOTLITE*
• TERRASIGNA*
• TRE ALTAMIRA*
• VITO*
• 4 EARTH INTELLIGENCE
• AVINEON*
• BUILDING RADAR*
• DARES TECHNOLOGY*
• DEWBERRY
• DHI*
• FUGRO*
• GEOCONCEPT*
• LIVEEO*
• RINA*
• SENSAR*
• SIXENSE*
• SUPERVISION*
• TESSELO*
• TRIMBLE
• CONSTRUCTION
COMPANIES
• FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
• INFRASTRUCTURE
MANAGERS
• INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT
ORGANISATIONS
• LOCAL, REGIONAL &
NATIONAL AUTHORITIES
• PUBLIC WORKS
COMPANIES
• PIPELINE OPERATORS
• OIL & GAS PRODUCERS
• UTILITY COMPANIES
• ALOS-2 (JAXA)
• COPERNICUS SENTINELS*
• COSMO-SKYMED (ASI)*
• LANDSAT (USCG)
• RADARSAT (CSA)
• RELEVANT IN-SITU
NETWORKS
• OTHER RELEVANT
EUROPEAN NATIONAL
MISSIONS
• FEDERATED
INFRASTRUCTURE
(E.G. GAIA-X)*
• COPERNICUS
COLLABORATIVE GROUND
SEGMENT*
• COPERNICUS DATA SPACE
ECOSYSTEM*
• WEKEO*
• COPERNICUS
ATMOSPHERE
MONITORING SERVICE
(CAMS)*
• COPERNICUS CLIMATE
CHANGE SERVICE (C3S)*
• COPERNICUS EUROPEAN
GROUND MONITORING
SERVICE (EGMS)*
• COPERNICUS LAND
MONITORING SERVICE
(CLMS)*
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
European2 EO industry in the global arena
The market remains dominated by North American
companies, with almost half of market shares, thanks to
their strong position in the data acquisition & dissemination
market and in the data processing market. Thanks to leading
companies such as Airbus, Leonardo (e-GEOS) and Fugro,
Europe ranks second and is almost on a par with its North
American counterparts. With seven companies among the
top ten, Europe even ranks first in the market for analysis,
insights & decision support.
EARTH
OBSERVATION
128INFRASTRUCTURE
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
GNSS positioning and timing power robust solutions in the infrastructure sector
Modern infrastructure drives the demand for high-end GNSS solutions
Over the past decade, the deployment of 4G and 5G communication networks has led to the stable
growth of T&S GNSS receivers. Their annual shipments have mainly been pushed by the upgrades to
the Digital Cellular Network as well as the deployment of small cells.
Annual shipments of around 50 000 PMRs confirm the stability of the market; shipments mainly serve
to replace outgoing products. In 2012, Europe, North America and Asia-Pacific had a roughly equal
share of 25% of the global market. The geographical balance had shifted by 2022 with Asia-Pacific
leading the market with roughly 40%, while North America fell to nearly 20% and the EU27 tying with
Africa and the Middle East (almost 15% each).
As shown in the graph, the overall drop in annual shipments in 2017 and subsequently in 2021 was
due to a decline in the sales of timing receivers for the Digital Cellular Network (DCN) and Small Cells
applications. The rapid growth of DCN prior to 2017 led to a satisfactory installed base of DCN which
was then followed by years of moderate growth in anticipation of the 5G roll-out. The 2021 drop in
Small Cells shipments is a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic that slowed down the deployment
of Small Cells.
Shipments of GNSS-based solutions (e.g. integrated in heavy machinery for machine guidance) in
particular for construction monitoring (and on a much smaller scale for post-construction monitoring)
continue their strong growth.
GNSS enables the 3D machine guidance system
In the construction industry, the effective operation of heavy machinery relies on RTK positioning
solutions to achieve pinpoint accuracy. However, maintaining precision and ensuring the availability
of position data, especially in challenging terrains, requires the integration of diverse technologies
and data sources.
GNSS receivers serve as the foundation for precise positioning, harnessing satellite signals to
determine the exact location of machinery. Multi-constellation receivers further elevate accuracy,
providing redundancy and enhancing performance, especially in environments where signal
reception may be compromised.
For improved precision, complementing base stations serve as reference points for the GNSS
signals. The introduction of Galileo High Accuracy Service (HAS) has the potential to further
innovate the construction industry in that regard, providing high-precision positioning without
the need for extensive RTK networks.
Further, inertial measurement systems are utilised to accurately measure and track the movements
of heavy machinery. This enhances the precision of positioning and supports safe operation.
Machine control systems are harnessed to automate machine operation based on GNSS data,
bolstering precision, and increasing efficiency of construction projects.
Additionally, visualisation solutions offer real-time guidance and feedback to operators, ensuring
that they can navigate the machinery precisely.
The seamless integration of these technologies and data sources into construction processes is
fundamental to achieving the precision and efficiency required for heavy machinery operations.
Modern industrial systems rely heavily on timing and synchronisation for their data
Today’s production systems increasingly rely on data from machines, processes and other sources.
As the amount and resolution of these various data streams continually increase, the benefits of
complex models such as Machine Learning algorithms can be properly trained and re-applied
to improve and optimise the production process.
This increasing complexity automatically leads to higher and more stringent timing and
synchronisation needs, which can be offered by the newest generations of timing receivers.
To ensure the smooth operation of different communication requirements needed for different
operations such as motion control, programmable logic control or predictive maintenance,
implementing and applying IEEE Time Sensitive Network (TSN) standards is the current trend
in the industrial automation market.
On top of this, the market for industrial Internet
of Things (IoT) devices is booming, and with it
the reporting data that these devices provide.
At the moment, these data often lack the proper
synchronisation with the same time source.
This gap is highlighted as one of the many IoT
challenges that the market currently faces. The
adjustment of the internal clock in order to align
it with the clocks of other devices within a larger
network, particularly for low-power IoT, can be
solved by relying on the latest GNSS technology.
c
rica + Caribbean
2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
mmunication (SATCOM) Professional Mobile Radio (PMR)
ular Network (DCN) Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)
e Small Cells
cast Post-Construction Monitoring
on Monitoring
Timing &
SynchronisationSurveying
2032 2033
ica
ica + Caribbean
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
Satellite Communication (SATCOM) Professional Mobile Radio (PMR)
Digital Cellular Network (DCN) Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)
Data Centre Small Cells
DTV Broadcast Construction Monitoring
Post-Construction Monitoring
Satellite Communication (SATCOM) Professional Mobile Radio (PMR)
Digital Cellular Network (DCN) Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)
Data Centre Small Cells
DTV Broadcast Post-Construction Monitoring
Construction Monitoring
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
© iStock
INFRASTRUCTURE129EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
EO-based construction progress monitoring and ground deformation
monitoring are on the rise
EO is increasingly used for the monitoring of large infrastructure
The use of EO-based services has not yet generalised in the infrastructure market but is becoming
common for the monitoring of large construction works and the management of widespread
infrastructure such as electric lines, road and railway networks or pipelines.
EO has many assets for the infrastructure sector: it provides historical data to assess exposure to
natural risks, it makes it possible to establish projections linked to the future impacts of climate
change and it provides frequently updated optical and radar images to track construction progress and
monitor threats to building structures. These key assets support the progressive penetration of EO in
the various infrastructure management activities, at all stages of the infrastructure life cycle.
In 2022, the total revenue generated by the sales of EO data and EO-based services to the infrastructure
sector represented more than €250 million, with more than 75% of this revenue being generated by
service sales.
In terms of applications, more than a half of this revenue can be attributed to the monitoring of
construction activities and to the monitoring of existing infrastructure for maintenance purposes.
The predominance of these application domains can largely be explained by the possibilities offered
by EO-based services to monitor large areas while minimising the need for on-site equipment and
inspection teams. The other main domains of application are the assessment of the environmental
impact of infrastructure and the selection of construction sites (with around 20% of revenues each).
EO improves construction progress monitoring while optimising costs
Unlike construction companies, which by definition
have visibility on the progress of the work they are
carrying out, infrastructure owners and financing
institutions cannot ensure a physical presence
on-site during the entire construction phase.
Nevertheless, to make sound decisions they need to
receive regular, unbiased and error-free information
about construction progress.
Thanks to the availability of very high resolution
and frequently updated satellite images, EO brings
new solutions in response to this need. Indeed, the
comparison of successive satellite images of a
construction site enables to remotely track progress through the monitoring of indicators such
as the set-up or removal of cranes, the presence of construction materials, waste materials or
trucks, and through the detection of new buildings. This can help optimise onsite inspections and
reduce inspection costs while improving worker safety.
Satellite-based construction progress monitoring is most particularly relevant to large construction
sites (e.g. gigafactories, airports) or construction works on multi-sites (e.g. construction of new
metro lines and stations) likely to involve a large number of actors, as well as construction activities
taking place in remote locations.
Copernicus EGMS supports the assessment of ground motion affecting infrastructure
Based on Sentinel-1 images, the Copernicus European Ground Motion Service (EGMS) is
available free of charge since May 2022 and provides users with ground motion data for all the
Copernicus Participating States plus the UK. The first baseline product, which covers the period
2015-2021, will be updated annually and will include a five-year rolling archive.
Infrastructure is one of the targeted market sectors for EGMS, which enables the extraction
of ground motion velocity values and time series of deformation for reliable measurement
points. The various products delivered by the service can be used as a starting point for the
investigation of ground motion affecting built assets (e.g. buildings, dams, bridges, airports) and
linear infrastructure (e.g. railways, highways, pipelines), and can serve as a basis for a systematic
large-scale monitoring.
Prior to construction activities, EGMS enables ground stability
to be assessed (e.g. to support the identification of areas
needing consolidation). During construction operations, it
contributes to the analysis of the impact of construction works
on their immediate environment (e.g. to detect if a ground
deformation coincides with the start of tunnelling activities).
Once construction is completed, the service helps identify
whether ground subsidence threatens infrastructure structural
health in the long term. Moreover, the availability of continuous time series enables to better
understand trends in ground deformations, seasonal effects, and local discontinuities.
EGMS data are accessible via the EGMS Explorer at https://egms.land.copernicus.eu
027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
planning Vulnerability Analysis
Construction monitoring
Pipeline monitoring
Monitoring of impact of human activities
on infrastructureent
0
50
100
150
200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (m
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
17%
5%
1%
12%
21%
18%
2%
2%
22%
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application 2022
Infrastructure site selection
and planning
Vulnerability Analysis
Permitting
Construction monitoring
Post-construction monitoring
Pipeline monitoring
ODA support monitoring
Monitoring of impact of human
activities on infrastructure
Environmental impact assessment
of infrastructures
€258 million
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application 2023
© iStock
© Copernicus – sentinel data
130INFRASTRUCTURE
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
Advanced data integration and applications contribute to further growth
of the GNSS market
Asia Pacific, EU27 and North America pushing GNSS adoption
While Asia-Pacific continues to dominate the infrastructure GNSS market (40%), Europe and North
America are expected to maintain around 10% and 20% of the market, respectively, over the next
10 years. With roughly 15% in 2022, the Africa and Middle East region is expected to see the largest
growth and secure almost 20% of the market by 2033.
Focusing specifically on the market for T&S receivers, the annual shipments are expected to see a steady
annual growth of 5%, bringing the total shipments from 260 000 units in 2023 to more than 430 000
units in 2033. These shipments will largely be dominated by small cells and DCN, in line with the ongoing
deployment of 5G networks as well as the preparation for the next evolution of our communications
network (see the box below on 6G). Over time, it is expected that the market for dedicated satcom will
disappear, in line with the latest smartphones being connected to satellite networks (annual shipments
going from 500 to 340 units). The application seeing the largest growth in terms of annual shipments is
forecast to be data centres, which are expected to more than double sales figures from 9 000 in 2023 to
23 000 by 2033. This trend is further explained on the ‘Key Trends’ page at the beginning of this segment.
On the geomatics side, shipments of devices for construction monitoring will grow annually by 10%
for the next three years before slowing down in the following years, with around 355 000 units shipped
in 2023 rising to 580 000 units in 2033.
Although projections on GNSS device shipments are higher than in the previous market report, the
projections for associated revenues have been slightly revised downwards due to evolutions of the
average price of receivers and the extension of their lifetime.
LEO satellites are transforming GNSS precision
GNSS constellations are composed of L-Band satellites orbiting the Earth, primarily in Medium
Earth Orbit (MEO) and Geosynchronous Earth Orbit (GEO). These constellations provide crucial
positioning and navigation data for a wide range of applications. A significant challenge in GNSS
positioning is convergence time when comparing Precise Point Positioning (PPP) to Real-Time
Kinematic (RTK). PPP typically requires a longer convergence time to achieve high-precision
positioning due to the need for precise atmospheric corrections. PPP-RTK further improves
performance and reduces convergence time for PPP by using corrections from a ground reference
network. However, an even more rapid convergence time is desired for some applications.
One promising development addressing this limitation is the incorporation of Low Earth Orbit
(LEO) satellites into the GNSS constellations which has the potential to eliminate the dependency
on precise atmospheric corrections for PPP-RTK users. This breakthrough could significantly
expedite the time required to achieve accurate positioning. Moreover, the integration of LEO
satellites into Positioning, Navigation, and Timing (PNT) solutions will open doors to rapid two-
way authentication checks, enhancing security in various applications.
In addition, having a substantial number of LEO satellites increases signal availability. A larger
constellation of satellites can potentially reduce Geometric Dilution of Precision (GDOP) and improve
Position Dilution of Precision (PDOP), ultimately leading to more accurate and reliable positioning data.
In the context of infrastructure-related applications, high-precision positioning achieved
through the integration of LEO satellite data can further enhance the efficiency and accuracy of
construction operations and maintenance activities.
The deployment of future mobile telecom networks should open up new
perspectives for GNSS-based Timing & Synchronisation
In 2022, Non-Terrestrial Networks (NTN) were listed as part of the 3GPP Release 17 (Rel-17)
projects with the aim of defining the future of 6G. Following the approval of normative activities
on NTN in the Rel-17, the topic attracted increasing interest from industry. Through NTN,
6G networks will contribute to greater enhanced communication for end users (both human
and machines) and provide a ubiquitous network coverage across regions and areas that are
currently receiving limited 5G coverage.
In a nutshell, NTN has become an umbrella term for any network that involves non-terrestrial
flying objects, including satellite communication networks, high-altitude platform systems
(HAPS) and air-to-ground networks. Today, a communication device will either be connected to
the 3GPP terrestrial network (e.g. smartphones), or to satellites (e.g. satellite phones). With NTNs,
all these communication devices will be connected to both terrestrial and satellite networks in the
grander 3GPP ecosystem.
The timing and synchronisation of these networks, which can be provided by GNSS timing
receivers, has already been identified to be a crucial aspect of the roll-out of NTNs as timing
relationships, the uplink time and frequency synchronisation demand stringent performances.
More information on Rel-17 is available at:
https://www.3gpp.org/specifications-technologies/releases/release-17
EU27 North America Asia-Pacific
Non-EU27 Europe Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
Satellite Communication (SATCOM) Professional Mobile Radio (PMR)
Digital Cellular Network (DCN) Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)
Timing &
SynchronisationSurveying
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
Satellite Communication (SATCOM) Professional Mobile Radio (PMR)
Digital Cellular Network (DCN) Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)
Data Centre Small Cells
DTV Broadcast Construction Monitoring
Post-Construction Monitoring
Satellite Communication (SATCOM) Professional Mobile Radio (PMR)
Digital Cellular Network (DCN) Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)
Data Centre Small Cells
DTV Broadcast Post-Construction Monitoring
Construction Monitoring
Shipments of GNSS devices by region
INFRASTRUCTURE131EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
Benefiting from state-of-the-art data computing technologies, EO-based solutions
are expected to become increasingly popular with infrastructure stakeholders
Behind a global revenue increase, regional disparities should persist
In the infrastructure sector, the total revenues generated by the sales of EO data and EO-based services
are expected to increase at a regular pace in the years to come.
However, significant regional disparities exist. North America has a dominant position, closely followed
by the Asia-Pacific region. These two regions alone account for two-thirds of global revenues. With its
third position, the European Union represents a share similar to the cumulative share of all the remaining
regions, namely non-EU Europe, Latin America, Africa and the Middle East.
By 2033, the ranking of the different regions should remain unchanged despite some evolutions in their
respective shares. Thus, the share of the Asia-Pacific region is expected to increase slightly while that
of North America and the European Union is expected to decrease slightly.
Although the capacity to develop and commercialise EO-based services is not necessarily dependent on
regional upstream capacities (value-added service providers can purchase data from any observation
satellite operator in the world), the fact is that the dominant regions are also the ones that happen to
have the most dynamic upstream sector.
The role played by the European Union in the provision of EO-based data and services relevant to the
infrastructure sector (e.g. Sentinel 1 data and the European Ground Motion Service delivered as part of
the Copernicus Land Monitoring Service) is not fully reflected when looking only at revenues. Indeed,
the corresponding data and products are made available free-of-charge to users by the Copernicus
programme and are therefore not accounted for in data and service sales.
International and EU initiatives to monitor the pollution caused by methane
transport infrastructure might boost the use of EO
Cutting methane emissions, which are responsible for about 30% of global warming, is part
of the fastest way to slow the rise of temperature and to fight against climate change. In this
perspective, the EU established its Methane Strategy in 2020 and launched, jointly with the US,
the Global Methane Pledge (GMP) at the occasion of the COP26 in 2021.
Since then, the Council of the EU and the European Parliament worked on a regulation which will
put new obligations on the actors of the energy sector.
In particular, operators will have to detect (and repair) methane leaks at set intervals, not only on
production sites but also in the gas transport infrastructure (e.g. pipelines). So far, methane leaks
were generally monitored through on-site inspections and hand-held sensors. The generalisation
of leak detection over large (and sometimes remote) areas on a regular basis will be very costly
and resource-consuming if performed by ground crews.
Due to its very specific spectral signature, methane can be
detected from space and several public and private satellite
missions exist (or will be launched soon) which have the
capacity to monitor methane concentrations in the atmosphere.
In this context, the new EU regulation might well boost the
development of operational satellite-based rapid methane
leak detection services for gas transport infrastructure.
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning are expected to support
the adoption of EO-based applications in the infrastructure sector
During the past few years, the improvement of
spatial resolution and update frequency of satellite-
based observation data and the multiplication
of EO satellite missions and constellations have
resulted into a massive increase in the volume of
data available to service providers and users.
Thanks to their capacity to enable high-
performance data processing and the fusion
of data coming from multiple sources (e.g.
various types of optical and radar data, GNSS,
seismometers), Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
Machine Learning (ML) are expected to become essential for the exploitation of the huge amount
of available data.
In the domain of infrastructure, AI and ML enable the automation of processes such as change
detection based on pattern recognition and object characterisation, which are key to infrastructure
management and to the monitoring and understanding of phenomena threatening infrastructure
(e.g. ground motion, vegetation encroachments). They should also help improve the quality of
the information delivered to users, for instance, through smart filtering of measurement points
that would not meet certain reliability thresholds.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
17%
5%
1%
12%
ales by application 2022
Infrastructure site selection
and planning
Vulnerability Analysis
Permitting
Construction monitoring
Post-construction monitoring
Pipeline monitoring
ODA support monitoring
Monitoring of impact of human
activities on infrastructure
Environmental impact assessment
8 million
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
© ESA
© iStock
132INFRASTRUCTURE
EUROPEAN SYSTEMS
The EU Space Programme provides invaluable benefits for infrastructure
Current usage of Galileo
Across the majority of telecom applications, the outcome of the
UCP discussions and other user consultations has shown that
Galileo-enabled receivers are widely in use. With Galileo
OSNMA, communication networks, as well as other critical
infrastructure, are enjoying the additional layer of trust that
is provided. Network synchronisation thereby becomes more
robust against certain level of spoofing attacks that otherwise
have the potential to disrupt services.
Galileo contributes to selection and planning phases of
infrastructure construction, in particular. Here, GNSS-RTK
(Real-Time Kinematic) solutions offer high precision and
are the preferred solution, providing significant cost savings
through reduced field expenses. Construction phases benefit
from receivers built into heavy machinery, enabling precise
operations.
In Europe, the majority of RTK providers have already
upgraded or have started to upgrade to Galileo.
EGNSS services and features to be explored
Studies and research are ongoing to identify use cases for
authenticated SBAS as a complement to Galileo OSNMA as
an additional layer of security and trustworthiness. As with
Galileo OSNMA, this service would be of great importance for
critical infrastructure such as the telecommunication networks
as well as for data centres. In the specific case of EGNOS, its
added value in terms of time accuracy and stability is already
known within the industry. Looking at the future, the provision
of an independent time source (EGNOS Network Time) and
its built-in integrity make it an ideal candidate to provide a
certified Time service.
With HAS, Galileo is the first constellation able to provide
a high-accuracy PPP service globally, directly through the
Signal-in-Space (SiS).
The provision of highly accurate measurements, necessary
during the phases of infrastructure planning and construction,
should be of interest to the sector.
High accuracy
service
More robust
Timing
Greater Timing
service
Availability
Resilience
Higher Timing
Accuracy
Authentication
features
Multi-
frequency
GalileoGalileo
EGNOS
Current usage of Copernicus
With its Full, Free and Open (FFO) data policy, Copernicus provides a one-of-a-kind data access for infrastructure developers
and operators and supports the development, monitoring and maintenance of safe, sustainable and resilient infrastructure.
The Sentinel imagery offers a spatial coverage which goes beyond any other in-situ-only monitoring solution, allowing the quick
receipt of valuable information over large and/or difficult-to-access areas. Thanks to the availability of long time series, it also offers
possibilities of change detection and evolution trend assessment that can then be followed up with other High Resolution (HR) or
Very High Resolution (VHR) imagery when necessary (tip-and-cue paradigm).
The diversity and amount of data and products offered by the Sentinels and the Copernicus services enable the development of
a wealth of applications that address the various phases of the infrastructure life cycle. In the planning phase for instance, the
Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) allows for the assessment of the impact of climate change on future constructions.
On the longer-term, the Copernicus Land Monitoring Service (CLMS) and Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service (CAMS)
deliver information (e.g. land cover information, air quality information) that can help to better identify the impacts of infrastructure
on their surroundings and on the environment. Delivered as part of CLMS, the European Ground Motion Service (EGMS) provides
millimetre-accuracy ground deformation maps at European scale, updated on a yearly basis and with a five-year rolling archive,
which support the identification of the areas where ground movements put infrastructure at risk. The Early Warning & Monitoring
component of the Copernicus Emergency Management Service (CEMS) also supports the protection of infrastructure through
the delivery of critical geospatial information for flood, fire and drought risk, at both European and global levels.
Copernicus Services
Sentinels
Sentinel-1 Sentinel-2
Land
(CLMS)
Climate Change
(C3S)
Atmosphere
(CAMS)
Emergency
(CEMS)
Terminology used on this page is explained in Annex 2 for both GNSS and EO performance parameters.
Sentinel-5P
INFRASTRUCTURE133EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
EUROPEAN PROJECTS
Several EU-funded projects investigate solutions to improve
infrastructure resilience
BUILDSPACE - Enabling Innovative Space-driven Services for Energy-
Efficient Buildings and Climate Resilient Cities
BUILDSPACE is a three-year EU-funded project that aims to procure innovative services for
the building and urban stakeholders and to support informed decision-making towards
energy-efficient buildings and climate-resilient cities.
Tested in three European cities, the project will combine terrestrial data (from IoT platforms
and BIM solutions), aerial imagery from drones and data from satellite services (Copernicus,
EGNSS), to enable the identification of hotspots with increased pressure on local city ecosystems
and higher probability for natural disasters (e.g. flooding), with the objective of issuing alerts
and recommendations for action to local governments and regions (e.g. support of policies for
building renovation in vulnerable areas).
BUILDSPACE will create a set of replication guidelines and blueprints for the adoption of the
proposed applications in building resilient cities at large.
More information available at: https://www.euspa.europa.eu/enabling-innovative-space-driven-
services-energy-efficient-buildings-and-climate-resilient-cities
CHRISS - Critical infrastructure High accuracy and Robustness increase
Integrated Synchronisation Solutions
CHRISS is a three-year EU-funded project which develops approaches for detecting
and mitigating radio interferences, jamming and spoofing attacks for the security of
telecommunication networks.
The project combines robust interference detection and mitigation algorithms, with spoofing
detection and user notification methods. Galileo OSNMA will ensure the authenticity of
GNSS data, and Galileo-based timing and synchronisation, together with blockchain-based
built-in security mechanism, will increase resilience to GNSS signals interference, jamming,
spoofing and cyberattacks on the fibre-optics distribution layer.
CHRISS will demonstrate a solution integrated into one device and resulting in increased time
distribution service availability, accuracy and reliability.
More information available at: https://chriss-project.eu
EOinTime - Satellite-based change detection and predictive monitoring of
infrastructure grids based on high resolution data
EOinTime is an 18-month EU-funded project that intends to scale up an EO monitoring service,
to help managers of large infrastructure networks to mitigate natural and anthropogenic risks
and keep operations running smoothly.
EOinTime integrates optical and radar satellite imagery with machine learning algorithms
and uses AI-based change detection algorithms that combine multiple time series data to
assess data patterns and detect abnormalities.
The project's final goal is to enable timely identification of any potential threat to infrastructure
networks, from rapid changes (e.g. extreme weather events) to quickly assess the location and
extent of damage, to slow changes (e.g. ground deformations, vegetation encroachments)
to facilitate the prediction of potential risks. Actionable insights are made available to users
through mobile and web apps.
More information available at: https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/190100375/en
STARLITE - Preparation Of Standards For Galileo Timing Receivers
STARLITE is a two-year project funded by the European Commission and benefiting from a
technical support from the EU Agency for the Space Programme (EUSPA) and from the European
Commission's Joint Research Centre (JRC). The project aims to initiate the standardisation
process for Timing Receivers, with particular emphasis on exploiting the capabilities offered by
the Galileo Timing Service.
The target users for the standard are all Galileo Timing users, with special focus on critical
infrastructure and critical applications within Telecommunications, Finance and Energy Sectors.
It is expected that the standard takes into account the specificities of the Galileo Timing and of
the various service monitoring levels it supports.
More information available at: https://ted.europa.eu/udl?uri=TED:NOTICE:059407-
2022:TEXT:EN:HTML
Horizon Europe,
a programme of the
European Union
Horizon Europe,
a programme of the
European Union
Horizon Europe,
a programme of the
European Union
Horizon Europe,
a programme of the
European Union
134INFRASTRUCTURE
REFERENCE CHARTS
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
Revenue from GNSS device sales by region Revenue from GNSS device sales by application
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 North America Asia-Pacific
Non-EU27 Europe Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Construction Monitoring
Small Cells
Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)
Professional Mobile Radio (PMR)
Post-Construction Monitoring
DTV Broadcast
Data Centre
Digital Cellular Network (DCN)
Satellite Communication (SATCOM)
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Satellite Communication (SATCOM) Professional Mobile Radio (PMR)
Digital Cellular Network (DCN) Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)
Data Centre Small Cells
DTV Broadcast Post-Construction Monitoring
Construction Monitoring
4 000
5 000
6 000
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 North America Asia-Pacific
Non-EU27 Europe Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Construction Monitoring
Small Cells
Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)
Professional Mobile Radio (PMR)
Post-Construction Monitoring
DTV Broadcast
Data Centre
Digital Cellular Network (DCN)
Satellite Communication (SATCOM)
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Satellite Communication (SATCOM) Professional Mobile Radio (PMR)
Digital Cellular Network (DCN) Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)
Data Centre Small Cells
DTV Broadcast Post-Construction Monitoring
Construction Monitoring
4 000
5 000
6 000
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 North America Asia-Pacific
Non-EU27 Europe Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Construction Monitoring
Small Cells
Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)
Professional Mobile Radio (PMR)
Post-Construction Monitoring
DTV Broadcast
Data Centre
Digital Cellular Network (DCN)
Satellite Communication (SATCOM)
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Satellite Communication (SATCOM) Professional Mobile Radio (PMR)
Digital Cellular Network (DCN) Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)
Data Centre Small Cells
DTV Broadcast Post-Construction Monitoring
Construction Monitoring
4 000
5 000
6 000
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 North America Asia-Pacific
Non-EU27 Europe Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Construction Monitoring
Small Cells
Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)
Professional Mobile Radio (PMR)
Post-Construction Monitoring
DTV Broadcast
Data Centre
Digital Cellular Network (DCN)
Satellite Communication (SATCOM)
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Satellite Communication (SATCOM) Professional Mobile Radio (PMR)
Digital Cellular Network (DCN) Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)
Data Centre Small Cells
DTV Broadcast Post-Construction Monitoring
Construction Monitoring
4 000
5 000
6 000
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
INFRASTRUCTURE135EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
REFERENCE CHARTS
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
€ (millions)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
Infrastructure site selection and planning Vulnerability Analysis
Permitting
Construction monitoring Post-construction monitoring
Pipeline monitoring
ODA support monitoring
Environmental impact assessment
of infrastructuresMonitoring of impact of human activities
on infrastructure
Infrastructure site selection and planning Vulnerability Analysis
Permitting
Construction monitoring Post-construction monitoring
Pipeline monitoring
ODA support monitoring
Environmental impact assessment
of infrastructuresMonitoring of impact of human activities
on infrastructure
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
Revenue from EO services sales by application
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
€ (millions)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
Infrastructure site selection and planning Vulnerability Analysis
Permitting
Construction monitoring Post-construction monitoring
Pipeline monitoring
ODA support monitoring
Environmental impact assessment
of infrastructuresMonitoring of impact of human activities
on infrastructure
Infrastructure site selection and planning Vulnerability Analysis
Permitting
Construction monitoring Post-construction monitoring
Pipeline monitoring
ODA support monitoring
Environmental impact assessment
of infrastructuresMonitoring of impact of human activities
on infrastructure
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
Revenue from EO data sales by region
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
INSURANCE AND FINANCE
136
INSURANCE AND FINANCE
The insurance and finance market segment includes services and products provided
and consumed by institutions and organisations in the insurance and financial service
domains. This includes insurers (and re-insurers) and international and local financial
institutions (e.g. private and commercial banks, stock exchanges or traders).
EO plays an important role in supporting insurance companies and financial institutions.
In Insurance, EO is used to assess damage and claims management (Event Footprint),
calculate indices for parametric products (Index Production) and support the prediction
and severity of a weather event (Risk Modelling). In finance, EO data supports screening
processes (i.e. risk assessments) undertaken by financial institutions for their investments.
Additionally, it contributes to the monitoring of goods production and shipping at key
locations. This provides investors/traders with information to predict supply and demand
to develop their investment strategies.
Finally, EO can help to provide indicators supporting of sustainable investing considering
environmental, social and governance factors to assess an investments financial returns
and its overall impact (ESG reporting).
From claims assessments in the insurance industry to time-stamping of transactions in
finance, GNSS timing and positioning information plays a key role. In addition to time-
stamping of transactions in financial (bank and stock exchange) applications, GNSS is
used for claim assessment (using GNSS-enabled drones for pre- and post-event analysis
and data gathering) in the insurance industry.
Note: Topics mainly related to the insurance sub-segment are indicated with an orange
circle , while the finance sub-segment topics are indicated with blue circle .
What you can read in this chapter
• Key trends: Space data is becoming an integral part of Insurance and Finance.
• User perspective: New Insurance and Finance policy and regulatory frameworks
redefine users' needs.
• Industry: Insurance and finance value chains.
• Recent developments: Technological innovations pioneered by end-user’s needs.
• Future market evolution: EO data & service sales for finance booming in the next
decade.
• European Systems and projects: Copernicus and Galileo working together for more
sustainable finance.
• Reference charts: Yearly evolution of installed base of GNSS devices and revenues as
well as EO revenues by application and region.
© iStock
Application descriptions can be found in Annex 3.Finance
• Commodities trading
• ESG Reporting
• Risk assessment
• Timing and synchronisation for financeInsurance for natural disasters
• Event footprint
• Index production
• Risk modellingLegend
EO application
GNSS application
Synergetic application
(combined use of EO and GNSS)
INSURANCE AND FINANCE137EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
KEY TRENDS
Space data is becoming an integral part of insurance and finance
Key market trends
• Parametric Insurance: a growing trend increasing the potential for EO in hybrid insurance products combining Weather Indexes and Yield Index Insurances
• The rising role of EO in Commodity Trading and Risk Assessment in bringing more accurate forecasts
• The insurance world embracing machine learning and artificial intelligence to digitalise the sector and increase value for customers
Parametric Insurance: a growing trend increasing the potential for EO in
hybrid insurance products
Index-based solutions have been steadily gaining momentum among prominent insurers and
facilitate the creation of innovative and bespoke insurance policies. The combination of Weather
Index Insurances (WII), leveraged by EO, with Yield Index Insurances (YII), creates hybrid solutions
bringing comprehensive coverage to farmers. Consequently, these custom-built products with tailored
requirements, enable insurers to provide support precisely when its needed most (during natural
disasters or extreme weather occurrences).
A testament to its growing popularity is that in 2009, merely 3% of total global agricultural insurance
premiums catered to index-based crop and livestock insurance products. However, in recent years,
this figure has surged to account for 12% of the total global premiums. A key contributor to this
advancement is EO, which furnishes both historical and near real-time data, thereby enhancing the
technical quality of index insurance products.
These index-based solutions, which combine EO data with other data such as meteorological data or
real-time data collected by loss adjusters in the field, will further emerge, involving more insurers and EO
data providers to jointly search for solutions and address the needs of insured farmers. Their joint efforts
will be directed towards crafting solutions that address the multifaceted needs of insured farmers. While
this concept has deeply rooted itself in disaster management, its applicability is broadening. It now
encompasses protection measures for businesses against challenges like infectious disease outbreaks,
outages, emergent climate risks, and even non-damage disruptions to intangible assets.
The rising role of EO in Commodity Trading and Risk Assessment
In the realm of commodity trading, satellite EO is becoming an increasingly important tool to furnish
traders and investors with dependable and precise information before market fluctuations occur. By
bringing an additional layer of information of production sites, goods transport, satellite EO data assist
in the forecasting annual yield estimations, crop prices, and projections on raw material and oil
inventories. Because of the introduction of new regulations, such as the EU deforestation act, there is
more pressure on entities to meticulously monitor and trace the origins of various commodities like cattle,
cocoa, coffee, palm-oil, soya and wood, as well as their by-products, including leather, chocolate, and
furniture. EO stands as a pivotal resource in shedding light on the sustainability impacts of numerous
globally traded commodities.
Service providers are already leveraging EO to aid companies in
determining their carbon footprint, curbing deforestation, and adhering
to sustainability guidelines. Example services include vegetation change
alert systems, which illustrate one's journey toward zero deforestation,
highlight high-risk areas, and assist in accurate reporting. EO data
enables insurers and helps financial entities to perform more precise risk
assessments and plan more informed, profitable and sustainable trading
strategies.
Synergising a myriad of technologies including machine learning and
artificial intelligence
The insurance market is on the cusp of a transformative phase, aligning itself with the fourth industrial
revolution by harnessing advanced analytical techniques such as machine learning and artificial
intelligence. These sophisticated tools not only amplify big data processing but also pave the way for
heightened accuracy in estimations, thereby delivering augmented value to customers. By synergising
a myriad of technologies, including GNSS, Wi-Fi/Bluetooth, GSM, RF, connected sensors, and an
underpinning cloud infrastructure, insurers are equipped to produce more offer (e.g., high precision
forecasts supported by machine learning and based on EO data). This integrated approach facilitates
a continuous, data-driven situational awareness by gleaning real-time and pinpointed information
regarding loss exposure. Such a strategic move not only empowers insurers to carry out meticulous
risk assessments, but also allows them to furnish customers with enhanced value through sustainable
offers. It underscores the sector's commitment to fostering and marketing environmentally-conscious
insurance products and fortifies their grasp on climate-associated risks.
© pexels.com
© iStock
138INSURANCE AND FINANCE
USER PERSPECTIVE
New insurance and finance policy and regulatory frameworks redefine users' needs
Sources of key EO and GNSS user requirements
The key EO and GNSS user requirements for the different applications within the
insurance and finance are, at EU level, collected using a harmonised procedure.
Information is collected through extensive interactions with user groups, providers
and experts in a continuous process culminating at the User Consultation Platforms
(UCP). All relevant requirements are documented in detail and updated regularly
within the Report on Insurance and Finance user needs and requirements. User
requirements for Earth Observation (EO) services and products – as well as their
evolution – are now also collected through the UCP. The process covers the EO
user needs and requirements of commercial users based on inputs from industry
experts and user groups, mirroring the existing process implemented for GNSS.
User requirements for Copernicus services and products – as well as their evolution
– are collected through an integrated process that involves different channels:
(i) dedicated studies (e.g. "NEXTSPACE" project, "Copernicus for EC (C4EC)"
study, Commission Staff Working Document on user needs); (ii) targeted consultations organised by the European
Commission or the entrusted entities with the relevant communities; and (iii) regular and structured exchanges among
representatives of the Copernicus governance structure and Member States through the Copernicus User Forum.
The 2022 UCP Insurance & Finance discussions made it clear that it was essential to include ESG reporting
as new finance application. ESG reporting entails the disclosure on the operation of an organisation related
to environmental, social and governance aspects. EO data can help providing indicators to improve ESG
measuring, monitoring and reporting, assessing investment’s overall impact and financial returns. Differently
from ESG application analysed under the Climate, Environment, and Biodiversity segment which helps verifying
the fulfilment of environmental requirements, ESG reporting in Finance specifically focuses on the economic
perspective of ESG helping financial institutions to comply with regulation and supporting investment decisions
that consider ESG factors to judge an investment's financial returns and its overall impact.
The application is currently quantified under the Environmental Monitoring segment as “Environmental Impact
Assessment and ESG”.
Growing sustainability concerns in the financial world to push the use
of EO
By establishing how financial market participants have to disclose sustainability information,
recent contemporary regulatory frameworks, such as the Task Force on Climate-related
Financial Disclosures (TCFD), the Taskforce on Nature Financial Related Disclosures (TNFD),
Sustainable Finance Disclosure Regulation (SFDR), the EU Taxonomy for sustainable activities,
EU Green Bond Standard, and the EU Action Plan on Sustainable Finance, are compelling
financial institutions to precisely monitor and document ESG metrics. These frameworks
drive companies to benchmark their sustainability efforts and ethical commitments in the
context of its financial prosperity and overarching operations. With the growing requisites of
investors and asset managers to access trustworthy sustainability data and risk management
methodologies for producing ESG products,
Earth Observation (EO) steps into the limelight. EO is pivotal in addressing
fundamental shortcoming by offering:
• real impact measurements;
• ensuring transparency and impartiality;
• frequent update and access to consistent measures; and
•provide scientific standards.
The use of EO for collecting sustainable finance data and to close the data gap
will be crucial for the implementation of data-driven, evidence-based policymaking
in areas like micro-prudential supervision, financial stability, macroeconomic
analysis, and risk and reserve management. EO, when paired with these emerging regulatory
blueprints, promises a future where financial decisions are both sustainable and deeply rooted
in verifiable evidence bringing unbiased calculated ESG scorings and allowing investors and
consumers to have informed opinions about environmental performances.
The importance of space data for green finance and green bonds
The rising demand for green finance solutions highlights a shift towards loans or investments
that champion environmentally-positive actions. These often encompass the acquisition of
eco-friendly goods and services or the development of green infrastructure. Notably, green
bonds dominate the landscape of green financing, as they encompass investments and
returns derived from eco-conscious initiatives like renewable energy, clean transportation,
and conservation. Further underlining the significance of sustainability in finance, the EU's
sustainable finance taxonomy regulation mandates regulators to incorporate ESG metrics in
discerning which sectors can be promoted as "sustainable investments". Traditional methods
frequently fall short in adequately monitoring the environmental footprint of specific industries.
In such scenarios, space data could emerge as a valuable tool, offering potentially enhanced
resolution levels and helping in the decision-making process for investors. For instance, the
Spatial Finance Initiative is tapping into the vast capabilities of EO data combined with
machine learning with the objective to transform the access to information within the financial
ecosystem. They aspire to generate asset-level data, poised to become a useful resource
for investors, regulators, and civil society, allowing a deeper, more detailed perspective on
environmental risks, implications, and prospects.
ESG reporting standards for insurance companies and financial institutions
Insurance companies and financial institutions face the imperative of integrating sustainable reporting
standards, necessitating them to embed multiple steps focused on ESG elements within their regulatory
project planning and operational activities. Given that these organisations have ownership of vast asset
portfolios, there is an anticipation for these companies to align with a more environmentally conscious
economy. The Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD) and its European Sustainability Reporting
Standards (ESRS) are merely one in a series of mandatory reporting requisites entering into force, with
notable examples in the EU including the SFDR and the EU taxonomy. Other international examples include
the International Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB) and its S1 and S2 standards and the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) requirements in the US.
The implications of ESG can have a profound impact across entire business, investment and insurance functions.
Examples of what investors and insurers can monitor and measure are the carbon emissions, deforestation, land
use changes, water scarcity and air pollution. For instance, insurers can use information on natural disasters
to determine whether an area presents a high insurance risk due to future climate conditions. Ultimately,
access to more accurate data, including EO, allows financial institutions and insurers to better understand the
environmental and social impacts of the companies they invest in or insure, which helps them make informed
ESG-related decisions.
© iStock
INSURANCE AND FINANCE139EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
INDUSTRY
Insurance and finance GNSS Value Chain1
SEARCH AND RESCUE
BEACON USERS NETWORK OPERATORS
SYSTEM INTEGRATORS
DESIGN CONSULTANCIES
TESTING & MAINTENANCE
• ACCENTURE
• ARBITER SYSTEMS
• CHRONOS TECHNOLOGY*
• COMTECH DATA
• IBM
• SAFRAN*
BANKS AND STOCK EXCHANGES• ARBITER
• CHRONOS TECHNOLOGY*
• ELPROMA*
• ENDRUN
• GORGY TIMING*
• JACKSON LABS
• MASTERCLOCK
• MEINBERG*
• MICROCHIP
• OSCILLOQUARTZ*
• SAFRAN*
• ALBEDO TELECOM*
• ARBITER SYSTEMS
• BODET*
• BRANDYWINE COMMUNICATIONS
• ELPROMA*
• ENDRUN TECHNOLOGIES
• FURUNO
• GMV*
• GORGY TIMING*
• GUIDETECH
• JACKSON LABS TECHNOLOGIES
• MASTERCLOCK
• MEINBERG*
• MICROCHIP TECHNOLOGY
• OSCILLOQUARTZ*
• SAFRAN*
• SEPTENTRIO*
• STMICROELECTRONICS*
• TALLYSMAN WIRELESS
• TRIMBLE
• U-BLOX*
COMPONENT AND RECEIVER
MANUFACTURERS DEVICE MANUFACTURERSGNSS
European2 GNSS industry in the global arena
GNSS receivers in insurance and finance are used for T&S applications,
including networks using GNSS time and NTP and PTP servers. In 2021,
Europe accounted for two thirds of the market shares for components and
receivers.
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in GNSS downstream activities.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 23 for a comprehensive description of the GNSS value chain and how to interpret them at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the company, though the actual area of activity might be wider
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
140INSURANCE AND FINANCE
INDUSTRY
Insurance and finance EO Value Chain1
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in EO downstream activities. Please note that enterprises listed in the data providers step of the value
chain often provide platforms as a service. For the sake of simplicity the data providers are not repeated in other stages of the value chain in which they are active.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 13 for a comprehensive description of the EO value chain and how to interpret them at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the company, though the actual area of activity might be wider.
END USERS
INFORMATION
PROVIDERS
EO PRODUCTS
AND SERVICE
PROVIDERS
PLATFORM
PROVIDERS
INFRASTRUCTURE
PROVIDERS
DATA PROVIDERS
• AIRBUS*
• BLACKSKY
• CAPELLA SPACE
• GEOSAT*
• E-GEOS*
• ICEYE*
• MAXAR
• PLANET
• SPIRE GLOBAL
• UMBRA
• AWS
• CLOUDFERRO*
• GOOGLE CLOUD
PLATFORM
• IBM CLOUD
• MICROSOFT AZURE
• T-SYSTEMS*
• CLEOS*
• CLOUDEO*
• CREODIAS*
• PLANET EXPLORER
• SENTINEL HUB*
(SINERGISE)
• TERRADUE*
• UP42*
• VITO*
Insurance & Finance:
• EARTH DAILY ANALYTICS
• GEOVILLE*
• VITO*
Insurance:
• GAF*
• LUXCARTA*
• SKYTEK*
Finance:
• AGTUALL*
• KAYRROS*
• SATELLIGENCE*
• SPACEKNOW
Insurance & Finance:
• ACCLIMATISE*
• ACCUWEATHER
• EARTHLAB AI SYSTEMS*
• ECOMETRICA*
• STORMGEO*
Insurance:
• GREEN TRIANGLE*
• VERISK ANALYTICS
• DESCARTES
UNDERWRITING*
Finance:
• ASSET RESOLUTION*
• CHAI*
• FLINTPRO
• GEOSPATIAL FINANCIAL
HUB*
Financial information
providers:
• BLOOMBERG
• MOODY
• REUTERS
• S&P GLOBAL
COMMERCIAL/
INVESTMENT BANKS
RE/INSURANCE SECTOR
• AIG
• ALLIANZ*
• AXA*
• GENERALI*
• GUY CARPENTER
• MUNICH RE*
• SWISS RE*
• WILLIS TOWERS
WATSON*
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
• REFINITIV
INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT
ORGANISATIONS
• AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT
BANK
• ASIAN DEVELOPMENT
BANK
• EUROPEAN BANK OF
RECONSTRUCTION AND
DEVELOPMENT*
• EUROPEAN INVESTMENT
BANK*
• INTER-AMERICAN
DEVELOPMENT BANK
• WORLD BANK
TRADING COMPANIES
EARTH
OBSERVATION
• COPERNICUS
SENTINELS*
• COSMO-SKYMED (ASI)*
• LANDSAT (USGS)
• METEOSAT (EUMETSAT)*
• NOAA AND GOES (NOAA)
• RADARSAT (CSA)
• RELEVANT IN-SITU
NETWORKS
• OTHER RELEVANT
EUROPEAN NATIONAL
MISSIONS
• FEDERATED
INFRASTRUCTURE
(E.G. GAIA-X)*
• SENTINEL
COLLABORATIVE
GROUND SEGMENT*
• GEOHAZARDS TEP*
• WEKEO*
• COPERNICUS
ATMOSPHERE
MONITORING SERVICE
(CAMS)*
• COPERNICUS CLIMATE
CHANGE SERVICE (C3S)*
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
European2 EO industry in the global arena
Europe maintains a leading position in the EO market for insurance and finance, with a significant portion of the total market
shares on a total segment value, while North American companies account for roughly a quarter of the market. At the
forefront of European leading companies, Airbus stands out as a significant frontrunner, followed by ICEYE and Kayrros.
INSURANCE AND FINANCE141EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Technological innovations pioneered by end-user’s needs
Driven by regulations in Europe (MFiD II) and the US (Finra), the finance sector witnessed a steady
uptake of GNSS timing receivers over the past decade. As specified in those regulations, financial
actors such as stock exchange and banks were required to ensure accurate time stamping of each
transaction which can be provided through GNSS receivers. In practice, each bank or stock exchange
has installed one or, sometimes, multiple GNSS receivers to prove that they are following requirements
from said regulations.
Analysing the distribution of GNSS device shipments across applications over the past decade, a
predominant trend emerges. The majority of shipments was related to Bank transactions, with
approximately 20 000 units deployed in 2022. This figure mirrors the numbers seen in 2012, barring
a notable surge in shipments during the mid-decade period.
In contrast, the shipments pertaining to Stock exchange transactions remained consistently lower
throughout the decade. Over the long term, no significant change is observed as the market is mature
and saturated.
Blockchain in combination with EO and GNSS and its importance for Finance
and Insurance applications
Blockchain is increasingly recognised as a pivotal instrument to propel the global digital economy
forward. Its core strength lies in facilitating secure data management across a plethora of interfaces
and stakeholders, ensuring data remains uncompromised in its integrity. Its applications span a wide
spectrum, including identity management, underwriting, claims processing, fraud management, and
guaranteeing reliable data availability, all while contributing to decreased operational costs. When
Blockchain is integrated with EO data, a multitude of benefits emerge: a) it amplifies the transparency
and efficiency in the movement of goods and financial services; b) it seamlessly links the tangible
environment to digital ledgers; and c) it aids in crafting organised data flows applicable in diverse
sectors, such as asset management, risk management, environmental management, logistics, and
insurance, to highlight just a few.
In May 2023, the European Parliament passed the regulation (EU) 2023/1114 or The Markets in
Crypto-Assets Regulation (MiCA) to trace crypto-asset transfers, to manage crypto-assets that are
not managed by current financial service legislation.
The regulation is intended to regulate as well as to foster user confidence in crypto-assets to allow the
development of a market and innovative digital services. The tracing of crypto-assets within European
boundaries will be enforced by geofencing, enabled by GNSS technology.
Innovative technologies in the ecosystem enable identification, monitoring, evaluation, and tokenization
of verified carbon trading in credits, with GNSS playing a role in geolocation verification.
For instance, the IFC, a World Bank affiliate, supports a Blockchain-enabled platform called the Carbon
Opportunities Fund platform for carbon offset exchange, enabling accurate valuation of environmental
programs and projects.Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean Stock Exchange transactions Bank transactions
0,0
0,1
0,2
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
Stock Exchange transactions Bank transactions
15
10
25
20
30
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
The rise of EO for commodity trading is driven by specific user needs
The current and future price of a commodity depends on the supply and demand, which in turn depends
on physical assets that are involved in exploiting, producing or storing said commodity. Traders benefit
from making accurate predictions on this market supply and demand by buying and selling future
contracts.
Depending on the commodity, traders have differing specific user needs in order to monitor activities that
provide meaningful information predicting the market. Traders can analyse imagery of physical assets
on the ground. However, the needed imagery differs in terms of resolution, frequency and historical data
depending on the commodity monitored. For example, in order to monitor a large agricultural field or the
stockpiles of an urban recycling site for wood waste, the needed spatial resolution to distinguish assets
on the ground differs quite a lot.
The use of satellite EO for commodity trading is on the rise as the imagery offered is improving in terms
of spatial resolution and temporal resolution and increasingly meeting the needs of the traders in
order to deliver credible and useful information.
142INSURANCE AND FINANCE
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
EO data & service sales for finance booming in the next decade
The insurance and finance segment is forecasted to be the largest EO downstream segment
within this market report, estimated to accumulate roughly 7 billion EUR in cumulative revenues
between 2023 and 2033, trailed by the Urban Development and Cultural Heritage segment (see page
180). Important drivers behind this growth are the advent of VHR satellite EO data, bringing more
opportunities to service providers to develop innovative EO products for commodity traders. VHR data
will also enable EO data providers to sell more data products to basically all applications.
When analysing closely the five applications within the segment, in 2023, commodities trading
is contributing for about one third of the total revenues. This application is also the one that is
foreseen to yield the greatest CAGR of 30% by 2033, reaching a total of 360 million EUR of revenue.
Accounting for roughly 240 million EUR in 2033, index production will witness a CAGR of 11% over
the next years.
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application
Event footprint Risk modelling Index production
Risk assessment Commodities trading
Event footprint Risk modelling Index production
Risk assessment Commodities trading
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application
Minimum capital requirements for European banks should consider
environmental risks
Since 2021, Environmental and other ESG risks have become increasingly integrated into European
banking supervision. Currently, the focus on integrating environmental and ESG pillars within the EBA
(European Banking Authority) prudential framework predominantly lies within supervisory reviews
and disclosures.
However, the EBA is now advocating for an expansion of this focus, suggesting that the analysis
of environmental risks should also encompass credit risks. EBA emphasises the necessity of
incorporating new risk categories, notably environmental risks, and promotes the employment of
internal models, external credit ratings, and the valuation of collateral and financial instruments.
A distinctive emphasis is placed on adopting forward-looking methodologies by the EBA, recognising
the long-term and non-linear characteristics of many environmental risks.
Banks face several pivotal challenges in this evolving landscape, including: 1) the procurement of pertinent
and trustworthy data regarding environmental risks and their potential financial repercussions; 2) the
creation of analytical instruments that can project the future implications of these environmental risks;
and 3) the ongoing monitoring of the evolving consequences of climate-centric and environmental
risks on an individual bank basis, as well as overseeing macroprudential capital buffers and accounting
provisioning stipulations. EO could potentially play a big role by bridging current existing data gaps
when assessing environmental and climate-related risks.
The importance of EO data for transparency in carbon markets
Carbon markets, having matured over time, stand as a pivotal mechanism to motivate the reduction
of GHG emissions and address climate change. Credits are issued for each equivalent amount that is
either curtailed or eliminated from the atmosphere. Yet, recent years have witnessed a diminishing trust
in carbon markets, attributed to previously false or overstated claims. EO offers a promising avenue to
bolster the dependability of these markets. By ensuring accuracy and introducing uniformity to carbon
projects, EO can furnish dependable and autonomous validation of carbon project effectiveness. This,
in turn, augments the credibility of carbon credits transacted in the market. Examples on the importance
of the role played by EO might involve conducting risk-based, transparent and universal carbon credit
rating, or the support given to companies to identify, track and reduce their emissions, as well as to
develop and monetise carbon credits. Moreover, EO can also support in conducting regular monitoring
of forestry carbon projects.
EO to enhance sustainable risk modelling
In response to climate change and emerging risks, insurance companies are increasingly recognising the
value of Earth Observation (EO), incorporating it more prominently into their risk models. The changing
climate actually makes current risk models less accurate prompting a demand for more and accurate
data inputs such as EO.
When satellite data is integrated with other data sources, like machine learning and GNSS, it
streamlines processes, ensuring they are more precise, swift, and efficient. This enhanced approach
notably improves risk modelling, offering more accurate predictions concerning risks associated with
assets and individuals. Such advancements furnish insurers with superior intelligence, optimising pricing
strategies, risk portfolio management, and decision-making processes. Moreover, this integration
presents an opportunity to foster greater resilience within households, businesses, and the broader
society.
INSURANCE AND FINANCE143EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
INSURANCE PROJECT: EO4I
The Earth Observation Best Practice for Agro-Insurance
(EO4I) project brought together both sectors to find out
more about Agro-Insurance needs and inform agricultural
insurers about current and future EO capabilities. To find
out about the needs and capabilities, the project involved
key industry partners from the Agro-Insurance sector:
Österreichische Hagelversicherung (AT), Schweizer
Hagel (CH), and Vereinigte Hagel (DE); within the project’s
extension this user group was joined by two reinsurers, Munich Re (DE) and Swiss Re (CH).
Several surveys, workshops and user meetings led to the best practice roadmap for the use of
EO data by the agro-insurance sector. Three key opportunities were identified in the project, as
shown in the figure on the right. The successful demonstration of three developed pilot services
should serve as a workable model and solution to enhance the business processes of insurers
and expand the regional application of these EO services in the future with other insurers and
financial institutions.
More information available at: https://earsc-portal.eu/display/EO4I
EUROPEAN SYSTEMS AND PROJECTS
Copernicus and Galileo working together for more sustainable finance
Current usage of EGNSS
Across the world, financial institutions such as banks and
stock exchanges rely on GNSS timing receivers for the
accurate synchronisation and time stamping of financial
transactions. The vast majority of such receivers put on the
market by most receiver manufacturers (see page 139 for
the industry value chain) are Galileo-enabled.
To address GNSS spoofing attacks, ongoing research is
being done regarding the adoption of Galileo OSNMA
as this authentication service would add an additional
layer of robustness to the timing receivers. GNSS
authentication through Galileo would also further
strengthen the resilience of the finance market which is
deemed by most nations across the world as a critical
infrastructure.
Current usage of Copernicus
The Copernicus Land Monitoring Service (CLMS)
provides geographical information on land cover, use
changes over the years, vegetation, subsidences, etc.
The information translated to indicators can be used by
insurers and financial stakeholders in supporting risk
management strategies, investment decisions, action
preventions to climate-related risks, ESG investment/
reporting, among others.
The Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) can support
Insurance and Finance applications via an assessment of
climate change impacts on biodiversity, risk management
for commodity trading, and sustainable water management
by providing reliable information to assess the past and to
make informed decisions for the future.
The Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service (CAMS)
can support the insurance and finance sectors by providing up-to-date catalogue of windstorms and
their associated impacts on the ground, and other historical events that help prediction calculations. It
also supports to gain access to consisted information related to air pollution or climate forcing.
The Copernicus Emergency Management Service (CEMS) provides on-demand detailed information
for selected emergency situations that arise from natural or man-made disasters anywhere in the
world. CEMS helps insurers and financial institutions to identify risks and assess damages.
More Robust
Timing
Greater Timing
Service
Availability
Resilience
More Robust
Timing
Authentication
features
Multi-
frequency
GalileoGalileo
EGNOS FINANCE PROJECT: PSVE
The project Port Stockpile Volume Estimation (PSVE) looks
to develop a module that seeks to quantify the volume of dry
bulk commodities (e.g., iron ore, coal) held at large international
commercial ports, critical for commodity trading. The intelligence
on these collections of stockpiles is crucial to create predictions and
estimations of the future commodities price fluctuations. Targeted
users of the module are producers, end-users, physical merchants
and financial players,
The developed module will use ML techniques to classify satellite
imagery from Sentinel-2 MSI and PlanetScope and fuses the imagery
with shipping data to increase the overall accuracy of the supply &
demand market forecasts of commodity traders.
More information available at: https://business.esa.int/projects/psve
Copernicus Services
Sentinels
Sentinel-1 Sentinel-2
Terminology used on this page is explained in Annex 2 for both GNSS and EO performance parameters.
Land
CLMS
Climate
C3S
Atmosphere
CAMS
Emergency
CEMS
Sentinel-5P
© PSVE
© EO4l
144INSURANCE AND FINANCE
REFERENCE CHARTS
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
Revenue from GNSS device sales by region Revenue from GNSS device sales by application
Installed base of GNSS devices by application0
20
40
60
80
100
120
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0,0
0,5
1,0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Stock Exchange transactions Bank transactions
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
Stock Exchange transactions Bank transactions
1,5
40
60
80
100
120
40
70
1000
20
40
60
80
100
120
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0,0
0,5
1,0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Stock Exchange transactions Bank transactions
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
Stock Exchange transactions Bank transactions
1,5
40
60
80
100
120
40
70
1000
20
40
60
80
100
120
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0,0
0,5
1,0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Stock Exchange transactions Bank transactions
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
Stock Exchange transactions Bank transactions
1,5
40
60
80
100
120
40
70
1000
20
40
60
80
100
120
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0,0
0,5
1,0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Stock Exchange transactions Bank transactions
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
Stock Exchange transactions Bank transactions
1,5
40
60
80
100
120
40
70
100
INSURANCE AND FINANCE145EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
REFERENCE CHARTS
Revenue from EO data sales by application
Revenue from EO services sales by application
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
€ (millions)
Event footprint Risk modelling Index production
Risk assessment Commodities trading
Event footprint Risk modelling Index production
Risk assessment Commodities trading
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
€ (millions)
Event footprint Risk modelling Index production
Risk assessment Commodities trading
Event footprint Risk modelling Index production
Risk assessment Commodities trading
Revenue from EO services sales by region
Revenue from EO data sales by region
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
MARITIME AND INLAND WATERWAYS
MARITIME AND INLAND WATERWAYS
The maritime sector relies significantly on GNSS and EO technologies, which have
become indispensable tools in many maritime applications. In particular, they are helpful
in achieving sustainability goals by reducing vessel emissions due to optimised navigation
paths, the preservation of ecosystems by path avoidance, the facilitation of greater port
security through advanced surveillance techniques as well as increasing maritime safety
for vessel operators.
GNSS and EO are also crucial building blocks for upcoming innovative solutions such as
autonomous and semi-autonomous vessels and have the potential to provide the same
level of safety and security provided by the current state-of-the-art instruments of fully
manned vessels.
Vessel-operators, port authorities, environmental agencies and recreational boaters
are examples of stakeholders whose daily activities are improved by EO and GNSS
technologies. Both EO and GNSS contribute to improving the efficiency, safety and
security of various maritime operations, whilst the use of satellite-based information
greatly improves decision-making as well as provides financially optimal solutions for the
entire maritime sector.
Cross-reference: GNSS-enabled Search and Rescue beacons, whilst used in this market
segment, are presented and quantified in the Emergency Management and Humanitarian
Aid market segment.
What you can read in this chapter
• Key trends: Growing digitalisation and automation of vessels and ports, for a sustainable
blue economy, and greater security.
• User perspective: Diversification of maritime activities with increasing emphasis on
societal impact.
• Industry: Maritime and inland waterways value chains.
• Recent developments: GNSS services can reduce carbon footprint of goods-transport
and increase port security.
• Future market evolution: EO steering the maritime sector through uncharted waters.
• European Systems and projects: Enhanced devices and advanced data for better
performance in maritime activities.
• Reference charts: Yearly evolution of installed base of GNSS devices and revenues as
well as EO revenues by application and region.
© IStockInland Waterways
• Autonomous Surface Vessels
• Collision avoidance (AIS, VDES)
• GNSS vessel engine management system
• Inland waterways navigationMaritime engineering
• Dredging
• Marine surveying and mappingOcean and Environmental monitoring
• Marine pollution monitoringRecreational craft
• Recreational navigationVessel tracking
• Dark vessel monitoringMerchant vessels
• Collision avoidance (AIS, VDES)
• GNSS vessel engine management system
• Maritime Autonomous Surface Ships
• Merchant navigation
• Navigation through sea ice
• Ship route navigationPorts
• Automated port operations
• Piloting assist at ports
• Port Operations1
• Port safety
• Port securityApplication descriptions can be found in Annex 31 (incl. Port-based Port navigation devices, PPUs and
Vessel docking).Legend
EO application
GNSS application
Synergetic application
(combined use of EO and GNSS)146
MARITIME AND INLAND WATERWAYS147EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
KEY TRENDS
Space technologies help the maritime community to improve sustainability
A clear trend noted across all economic sectors is the implementation of modern technologies, not least
of all, insights from satellite-derived data, to transition towards informed and fact-based choices that
reduce the negative impacts of anthropogenic activities in the maritime sector. Overall, data collected
from EO and maritime GNSS activities contribute towards a greener and cleaner blue economy.
The environmental impact of shipping operations, maritime construction and renovation of ports can
be minimised via the use of (near) real-time satellite data. Safety can be enhanced, and sustainable
practices can be both enabled/monitored, by both EO and GNSS, supporting the achievement of
traceability in maritime value chains.
The EO component of the EU’s space programme is already being used for a wide range of land, sea
and atmospheric monitoring purposes. Specific EO applications for the maritime sector include: marine
pollution detection, biodiversity and ecosystem conservation and emissions monitoring. These are three
areas in which EO is contributing to monitoring and protecting marine areas.
Improved connectivity and digitalisation are improving the efficiency and the
security of port operations
Advanced 5G connectivity and the Internet of things (IoT) enables greater adoption of autonomous
port use cases. The growing automation of port operations is leading to increased emissions monitoring
in ports and the evolution of digital twins of port structures such as quays for onloading and offloading
purposes. IoT technology is also having a consequential impact on smart containers for tracking, loading
and unloading and in port management systems. Key benefits of IoT enabled shipyards are minimising
docked down time with automatic scheduling, as well as automatically tracking unloading times and
reducing detention and management costs.
The Port of Algeciras has already implanted
the use of GNSS with other technologies like
5G to increase port security with geolocation
of assets. GNSS tracking systems pinpoint the
location of cargo containers in real-time, and
combined with virtual reality supported by 5G, it
allows to handle security issues more effectively,
track cargo and equipment accurately, and
overall, streamline logistical operations.
Automation in the maritime sector: regulatory initiatives are paving the way
for maritime autonomous surface ships
The International Maritime Organisation (IMO) has been addressing the regulatory challenges of
autonomous vessels at the international level. The goal-based maritime autonomous surface ship
(MASS) Code is expected to be adopted as a mandatory code under SOLAS in the future. The MASS
Code will need to establish a robust safety regime for MASS that ensures safety of life at sea, as well
as safety of cargo on board and the MASS itself. The non-mandatory, goal-based code for MASS could
potentially enter into force on 1 January 2028 as a mandatory code.
At European level, the European Maritime Safety Agency (EMSA) has been involved in the development
of guidelines and regulations for the operation of autonomous ships, through the project AUTOSHIP.
Automation is also leading to new applications for inland waterways shipping, such as bridge collision
warning, automatic guidance and mooring assistance, which need higher precision coming from
on-board sensors and infrastructure.
Finally, EUSPA is supporting the collection of GNSS user requirements for MASS in the frame of the
User Consultation Platform (see next page).
Cyber security and communications resilience in the maritime sector
Since February 2020, the maritime sector has experienced a fourfold increase in attempted
cyberattacks, including GNSS spoofing and jamming, and there has been a staggering 900% rise in
attacks on operational technology, such as ship management software, within shipping vessels between
2017-2020. Cyber incidents can arise as the result of loss of or manipulation of external sensor data,
critical for the operation of a ship. IMO Guidelines on maritime cyber risk management provide high-level
recommendations to safeguard shipping from current and emerging cyberthreats and vulnerabilities. It
also includes functional elements that support effective cyber risk management.
The maritime sector recognises the importance of resilient and secure GNSS positioning. Efforts are
being made to enhance the integrity and robustness of GNSS signals against spoofing and jamming
threats. The adoption of technologies like eLoran (Enhanced Long-Range Navigation) is being explored
as a backup or complementary system to GNSS.
EO has a growing role in supporting greater maritime spatial awareness. For instance, it enables the
identification of suspicious activities by monitoring coasts and port surroundings. SAR constellations
are promising near real-time monitoring, with services provided day or night and are not affected by
inclement weather. The imagery can be used by coast guard agencies to identify illegal activities ex
ante and ex post, but also by insurance companies to reconstruct timelines and MetOcean conditions at
sea if ships encountered difficulties such as loss of containers.
Growing digitalisation and automation of vessels and ports,
for a sustainable blue economy and greater security
Key market trends
• EO and GNSS technologies can help the maritime sector to advance on sustainability, utilising satellite-derived insights to minimise environmental impact and enable sustainable practices
• A rise in cyberattacks, including GNSS spoofing, prompts efforts to enhance GNSS security and explore alternatives
• The evolution of connectivity solutions and advancements in digitalisation help ports to achieve efficiency and security of operations
• Regulatory actions are preparing the ground to the future advent of autonomous ships
© iStock
148MARITIME AND INLAND WATERWAYS
USER PERSPECTIVE
Sources of key EO and GNSS user requirements
The key EO and GNSS user requirements for the different application groups within the Maritime segment are, at EU level, collected using a harmonised procedure.
Information is collected through extensive interactions with user groups, providers and experts in a continuous process culminating at the User Consultation Platforms (UCP). All
relevant requirements are documented in detail and updated regularly within the Report on Maritime, Inland Waterways, Fisheries and Aquaculture user needs and requirements.
User requirements for Earth Observation (EO) services and products – as well as their evolution – are now also collected through the UCP. The process covers the EO user needs
and requirements of commercial users based on inputs from industry experts and user groups, mirroring the existing process implemented for GNSS.
Moreover, the collection of specific requirements for Copernicus services and products is supported by an integrated process that involves different channels: (i) dedicated studies
(e.g. "NEXTSPACE" project, "Copernicus for EC (C4EC)" study, Commission Staff Working Document on user needs); (ii) targeted consultations organised by the European
Commission or the Entrusted entities with the relevant communities; and (iii) regular and structured exchanges among representatives of the Copernicus governance structure and
Member States through the Copernicus User Forum.
1 . More information about HAS performance available at Galileo-HAS-SDD_v1.0.pdf (gsc-europa.eu)
Diversification of maritime activities with increasing emphasis on security
and environmental impact
Maritime operations depend on reliable systems
The Galileo SAR (Search and Rescue) service
is a key component of the global Cospas-Sarsat
distress alert system, designed to locate and
assist people in distress situations at sea, in the
air or on land. It reduces the time taken to detect
a person equipped with a distress beacon
after activation. This system also allows the
transmission of return messages to the victims,
assisting in the coordination of rescue efforts.
More information is available on page 86.
The Galileo High Accuracy Service (HAS) went live in 2023, the accuracy
offered is expected to be less than 25 cm horizontally and 30 cm vertically, free
of charge.1 Galileo is the first constellation that provides such a service globally
and directly through the Signal in Space. Stakeholders in the maritime sector
have identified applications such as docking and ships navigating in ports
and maritime engineering services such as construction and dredging, where
safety of operations can be enhanced via a precise positioning service.
The Galileo Open Service Navigation Message Authentication (OSNMA)
is an authentication service verifying the authenticity of the GNSS
information and of the entity transmitting it, to ensure that it comes from a
trusted source. OSNMA will help reducing the important amount of GNSS
spoofing incidents currently occurring in the maritime domain, which are
leading to erroneous data of a vessel’s position, speed and direction, posing
real threats not only to its own operations, but also to surrounding ships and
especially those carrying dangerous goods. OSNMA will be made available
free of charge to users.
Satellite EO supports all stakeholders of the blue economy through informed business decisions
and increased efficiency of operations to minimise negative impacts
The world's oceans are experiencing an increasing presence of anthropogenic activities, which directly or indirectly
impact the marine ecosystem due to ocean acidification, diffusion of (micro)plastics, debris, ship-related contaminants,
eutrophication, and other harmful substances. The impact of these harmful activities on the ecosystem in turn generates
a negative spiral on the economic activities.
To limit the negative impact on the maritime environment, there is an increasing regulatory focus on the blue economy to
promote sustainable practices reducing environmental impact, ensure sustainable use of resources, and preserve marine
ecosystems. Addressing this concern involves enhancing maritime fleet efficiency, modernising ports towards zero-
emissions, designating marine preservation areas, thereby mitigating climate effects and yielding long-term economic
benefits.
EO Satellite data, including SAR-based and optical imagery, is playing an increasingly important role in tackling the
above-mentioned challenges, as it allows to monitor the global maritime environment at unprecedented levels. To support
companies across the globe, Copernicus is offering several services to support decision-making in the maritime field.
The Copernicus Marine Service (CMEMS), is a comprehensive global monitoring system for the world's oceans. It provides
routine, high-quality information about the physical state, variability and dynamics of the ocean and marine ecosystems.
The service supports multiple sectors, including maritime safety, marine conservation, fisheries management, coastal and
marine environment, along with climate forecasting.
Dedicated user hubs have been developed such as the Coastal Hub and the Arctic Hub. These web portals provide
dedicated data and information on coastal and Arctic environments, that can be explored through interactive maps and
thematic use cases, with the aim to foster informed decision-making and promoting sustainable management strategies.
The Copernicus Maritime Surveillance Service (CMS), part of the Surveillance Service (CSS), offers satellite surveillance
information to all EU Member States' sea-related entities. System data is accessible within 30 minutes of a satellite
overpass. The CMS value-added products help protect the environment, by supporting tasks such as vessel detection,
activity monitoring, oil spill detection, incident tracking, and sea object monitoring.
The use of the different Copernicus services is free of charge and aims to meet the evolving needs of the different
stakeholders.
© iStock
MARITIME AND INLAND WATERWAYS149EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
END USERS
INFORMATION
PROVIDERS
EO PRODUCTS
AND SERVICE
PROVIDERS
PLATFORM
PROVIDERS
INFRASTRUCTURE
PROVIDERS
DATA PROVIDERS
• AIRBUS*
• BLACKSKY
• CAPELLA SPACE
• E-GEOS*
• GEOSAT*
• HAWKEYE 360
• ICEYE*
• KLEOS SPACE*
• MAXAR
• PLANET
• SPIRE GLOBAL
• UMBRA
• AWS
• CLOUDFERRO*
• GOOGLE CLOUD
PLATFORM
• IBM CLOUD
• MICROSOFT AZURE
• T-SYSTEMS*
• CLOUDEO*
• CREODIAS*
• EARTH-I
• EDS CEODE
• EURODATACUBE*
• GOOGLE EARTH ENGINE
• NORTH.IO*
• OPEN DATA CUBE
• OPENEO*
• PLANET EXPLORER
• SENTINEL-HUB*
(SINERGISE)
• UP42*
• ACRI*
• AIRBUS SE*
• BMT ARGOSS*
• BERRING DATA
COLLECTIVE*
• CLS*
• DESCARTES LABS
• E-GEOS*
• EODC
• EOMAP*
• GMV*
• INDRA SISTEMAS*
• KSAT*
• MAXAR
• PIESAT
• RHETICUS (PLANETEK)*
• STORMGEO*
• VITO*
COASTAL AND MARITIME
EXPLOITATION AND
PRESERVATION:
• BROCKMANN CONSULT*
• EOMAP*
• GEOOPTICS
SHIPPING AND MARITIME
TRANSPORT:
• C-MAP
• DNV*
• EOMAP*
• ESRI UK*
• GLOBAL MARITIME*
• OCEANROUTE
• SAT-OCEAN
• STORMGEO
DATA ANALYTICS
COMPANIES
• PORT AUTHORITIES
• SHIP OPERATORS
• SURVEILLANCE
AUTHORITIES (both national
and international)
EARTH
OBSERVATION
• COPERNICUS SENTINELS*
• COSMO-SKYMED (ASI)*
• LANDSAT (USGS)
• METEOSAT (EUMETSAT)*
• NOAA AND GOES (NOAA)
• RADARSAT (CSA)
• RELEVANT IN-SITU
NETWORKS
• OTHER RELEVANT
EUROPEAN NATIONAL
MISSIONS
• FEDERATED
INFRASTRUCTURE
(E.G. GAIA-X)*
• SENTINEL COLLABORATIVE
GROUND SEGMENT*
• EMODNET*
• COASTAL TEP
• CODE DE*
• COPERNICUS DATASPACE
ECOSYSTEM*
• NOAA ONESTOP (NOAA)
• WEKEO* • COPERNICUS MARINE
SERVICE (CMEMS)*
• COPERNICUS SECURITY
SERVICE (CSS)*
USERS OF
POSITIONING
INFORMATION
USERS
SYSTEM
INTEGRATORS
COMPONENT
AND RECEIVER
MANUFACTURERS
MARITIME ORGANISATIONS
CIRM (International Association for Marine
Electronics Companies)
EMSA (European Maritime Safety Agency)
IALA (International Association of Marine
Aids to Navigation and Lighthouse Authorities)
IAPH (International Association of Ports and
Harbors) and ESPO (European Sea Ports
Organisation)
ICS (International Chamber of Shipping) and
BIMCO (Baltic and International Maritime
Council)
IMO (International Maritime Organization)
IMPA (International Maritime Pilots'
Association) and EMPA (European Maritime
Pilots' Association)
• ANALOG DEVICES
• ALPHATRON
MARINE* (PART OF
JAPAN RADIO CO)
• BEIJER ELECTRONICS*
• BEIJING BDSTAR
NAVIGATION
• CHCNAV
• COBHAM*
• COBRA ELECTRONICS
• CYBERNETICA*
• FURUNO ELECTRIC
• GARMIN
• GMT CO.
• HEXAGON*
• INTELLIAN
TECHNOLOGIES
• KONGSBERG
MARITIME*
• NAVICO*
• NUVOTON
• ORBCOMM
• SEAS OF SOLUTIONS
• SEPTENTRIO*
• U-BLOX*
• UNISTRONG GNSS
• WARTSILA*
• AB VOLVO*
• BEIBU GULF PORT
GROUP
• COBHAM*
• FURUNO ELECTRIC
• GME
• HYUNDAI
• INMARSAT*
• JAPAN RADIO CO
• JOHNSON OUTDOORS
• KAWASAKI
• KONGSBERG
MARITIME*
• LOCKHEED MARTIN
• MITSUBISHI
• OCEANEERING
INTERNATIONAL
• PRONAV
• SAAB*
• SAMYUNG ENC
• UNISTRONG GNSS*
• VIASAT
• WARTSILA*
• XIAMEN YAXON
NETWORK
• XINUO
SHIP OWNERS/
OPERATORS:
• APL
• CMA CGM
GROUP*
• EVERGREEN LINE
• HAPAG-LLOYD*
• MAERSK LINE*
• MSC*
OFF-SHORE
OPERATORS
RECREATIONAL
BOATERS
SOLE MARINERS
DATA-ANALYTICS
COMPANIES:
• MARINETRAFFIC
• MYSHIPTRACKING
• VESSELTRACKER
PORT AUTHORITIES
SURVEILLANCE
AUTHORITIES
GNSS
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European
companies involved in GNSS and EO downstream activities.
Please note that enterprises listed in the data providers step
of the value chain often provide platforms as a service. For
the sake of simplicity the data providers are not repeated in
other stages of the value chain in which they are active.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus
Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 13 and 23 for a comprehensive
description of value chains and how to interpret them at
segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with
respect to the headquarters of the company, though the
actual area of activity might be wider.
Maritime and Inland Waterways Value Chains1
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
European2 GNSS and EO
industry in the global arena
GNSS receivers in maritime and
inland waterways are similar to those
used in fisheries and aquaculture,
with a significant overlap in terms
of industry. European companies,
including Navico, Kongsberg, and
Wärtsilä, hold roughly 40% of the
maritime market.
Europe has the largest share of the
overall market for Earth Observation
at close to 60%, followed by North
America with just a quarter of the
market. The biggest EU players are
Leonardo (e-GEOS), Airbus, Acri,
and CLS.
INDUSTRY
150MARITIME AND INLAND WATERWAYS
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
GNSS services can reduce carbon footprint of goods-transport and increase
port security
In 2022, the global size of GNSS shipments in maritime reached 1.9 million units across all applications
used for positioning and navigation for maritime vessels and port operations. Maritime GNSS shipments
have showed constant growth, from over 1.0 million units in 2012.
Recreational navigation continues to be the largest application in this segment. It is expected that
shipments of GNSS devices for this application will grow from over a million to almost two millions of
shipments between 2012 and 2022.
Aside from recreational navigation, inland waterways navigation is the largest application, recording
almost 75 000 unit shipments in 2022. The shipments of GNSS devices for ports – including Portable
Pilot Units (PPUs) – account for 21 000 units. The application registered the highest CAGR over the
decade (18%), in line with the historical trend.
Merchant navigation shipments have remained stable across the past decade, in line with the market
trends of the shipbuilding industry. They add up to around 25 000 units per year.
EO and GNSS enabling safety and autonomy at sea
The emergence of autonomous or semi-autonomous vessels signifies a significant
breakthrough in the maritime industry, offering substantial cost reduction opportunities
by minimising the reliance on marine manpower, a major component of shipping costs. This
advancement enhances overall competitiveness in the maritime sector. Beyond traditional goods
transportation, autonomous marine vessels demonstrate versatility, finding applications in
marine monitoring, surveying for data collection, and supporting research initiatives.
The integration of GNSS and EO technologies in autonomous vessels reflects a promising
evolution in maritime operations, fostering efficiency and environmental responsibility.
These cutting-edge technologies heavily depend on GNSS for precise positioning. Galileo's
authentication and high-accuracy services can facilitate the operation of autonomous vessels
in complying with safety regulations, by helping to meet the minimum safety requirements for
autonomous vessels set in the relevant standards.
EO contributes to strategic planning, particularly for offshore renewable energy projects, aligning
with the goals of the European Green Deal.
Projects and initiatives supported by the EUSPA play a pivotal role in advancing autonomous
shipping. Consortia arising from EUSPA projects, like the National Technical University of Athens
(NTUA) consortium, including Delft University of Technology, SINTEF Ocean, and others, are
actively addressing challenges and opportunities in autonomous shipping. These endeavours aim to
contribute to sustainability goals, aligning with the broader objectives of the European Green Deal.
Space data and drones are the future of port safety and security
Remote sensing plays a crucial role in bolstering port safety through vigilant surveillance.
The integration of drone technology and Earth Observation contributes to an extremely
comprehensive approach to port safety, ensuring a thorough understanding of both surface
and underwater conditions for effective operational management. While Earth Observation
techniques provide essential data on the bathymetry of sea floors adjacent to ports, this data has
to be supplemented with radar or drone surveying techniques. Recent advancements in remote
sensing have enhanced these capabilities, offering a more sophisticated solution for mapping and
accurately estimating the dynamic evolution of the seabed within port areas.
For example, the PASSport (Operational
Platform managing a fleet of semi-autonomous
drones exploiting GNSS high Accuracy and
Authentication to improve Security & Safety
in port areas) project aims to engineer and
qualify a solution that enhances situational
awareness in port areas. PASSport envisions
activating commercialisation channels by
leveraging the novelty of using a fleet of semi-
automated drones integrated with Galileo
services, and other sensors. Sentinel-2 supplies
satellite imagery to bolster these techniques.
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
Port Operations
Collision Avoidance (AIS, VDES) Dark Vessel Monitoring
DredgingMarine Surveying and Mapping
Inland Waterways Navigation
Merchant Navigation Recreational navigation
1 000
1 500
2 000
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
© PASSport project
Validation campaign on pollution monitoring -
Kolobrzeg, Poland - https://h2020-passport.eu/
MARITIME AND INLAND WATERWAYS151EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
EO: steering the maritime sector through uncharted waters
The revenue generated from EO applications in the maritime sector has been steadily growing over
the years, reflecting the increasing importance of these services. Revenue in the maritime sector is
primarily driven by a range of different applications, each contributing significantly to the industry's
growth.
Revenue from ship route navigation services is estimated to increase from almost €40 million in 2023
to over €70 million in 2033. This application plays a crucial role in enhancing maritime efficiency and
represents about 45% of the total market in this segment.
Marine surveying and mapping is currently the second largest application. Associated revenues are
expected to grow significantly over the period considered. EO based services will grow from more than
€11 million in 2023 to more than €21 million in 2033.
Maritime pollution monitoring is increasingly prominent as environmental concerns drive the demand
for pollution control measures in maritime regions.
EO information supporting the safe navigation through sea ice, accounting for 12% of the market, dark
vessels monitoring (10% of the market) and maritime and pollution monitoring, (almost 10% of the
market), jointly represent one third of the revenue in the maritime domain. This remains true over the
decade under analysis.
Autonomous ships seamlessly sailing through inland waterways
The development of semi-autonomous or fully unmanned ships stands as a major trend in the
maritime industry, propelled by breakthrough innovations in digital technologies such as artificial
intelligence, smart robotics, and advanced navigation systems.
Galileo authentication and high-accuracy features are enablers for the application in inland
waterways. GNSS data, including Galileo, supports the identification and tracking of vessel traffic,
ensuring safe navigation and collision avoidance. Additionally, precise mapping of inland waterways,
facilitated by EO, contributes to the geospatial understanding necessary for effective route
planning. In synthesis, the use of EU Space Data from Galileo, EGNOS, and Copernicus is pivotal
for reliable positioning and harmonised imagery to facilitate safe and green automated operations.
In line with this, the European Parliament has allocated a budget to the European Commission
to launch a study covering EU Space Data for automated vessels in European waterways.
The study will analyse technical and regulatory barriers, industry value chains, and business
models related to automated vessels, emphasising synergies between satellite-based navigation,
imagery, and telecom. Furthermore, it will develop a prototype of on-board equipment utilising
Galileo differentiators and define a Copernicus safety case for inland waterways, implementing
pilot activities to demonstrate feasibility.
The general objective is to contribute to the development, demonstration, and deployment of
holistic, smart, and automated shipping concepts in line with NAIADES III objectives.
European Marine Observation and Data Network (EMODnet) and the ocean floor
The EMODnet broad-scale seabed habitat map for Europe, also known as EUSeaMap, is a
comprehensive and freely available map of physical marine habitats supported by EO data. It
serves to harmonise mapping procedures and promote a common understanding among seabed
mappers in Europe. The maps are generated with satellite derived bathymetric data. Copernicus Marine
Service and EMODnet are working together on the European In Situ Marine Data Service Landscape.
Phase four of EMODnet Seabed Habitats ongoing efforts involves the
expansion and enhancement of Europe's sole extensive repository of
habitat maps derived from surveys and the accumulation of survey sample
points. This expansion aims to broaden its scope to encompass coastal
wetlands and crucial fish habitats. This update extends its coverage to
include two new regions: the Caspian Sea and certain European territories
situated in the Caribbean. These collective efforts seek to enhance our
understanding of Europe's marine habitats and their distribution,
promoting sustainable management and conservation practices.
EMODnet also provides a publicly accessible repository of coastal bathymetry data in Europe.
Accurate information about potential underwater hazards, as well as about the depth of water
along shipping routes and while entering ports, is necessary for safe maritime transport, especially
for large ships. EMODnet also offers the most complete worldwide bathymetric layout, which also
boasts the highest resolution currently of such data.
0
20
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Navigation through sea ice Ship route navigation Port safety
Port securityInland waterways navigation
Dark vessel monitoring Marine surveying and mapping Maritime pollution monitoring
Navigation through sea ice Ship route navigation Port safety
Port securityInland waterways navigation
Dark vessel monitoring Marine surveying and mapping Maritime pollution monitoring
0
20
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application
© iStock
152MARITIME AND INLAND WATERWAYS
EUROPEAN SYSTEMS AND PROJECTS
Enhanced devices and data for better performance in maritime activities
Current usage of Copernicus
The Copernicus Marine Service (CMEMS) provides
free and open scientifically-assessed ocean data
across the global ocean. More information is
available on page 148.
Under the CSS, there is a service called Copernicus
Maritime Surveillance Service (CMS). More
information is available on page 148.
Under the CLMS, there is a service called European
Ground Motion Service (EGMS). The EGMS is
capable of monitoring land subsidence, which is
particularly important in the context of maritime
ports many of which are partially built on land that
is prone to subsidence. EGMS gives port-based
stakeholders the ability to monitor port protection
infrastructure and take action if subsidence poses a
risk to the safety of port operators or traded goods.
New EGNOS service for maritime
The goal of the EGNOS SoL assisted service for
Maritime Users (ESMAS) is to offer a service
tailored to maritime users. It is based on the
current EGNOS system, which augments GPS L1
C/A signal by providing corrections and integrity
information for positioning and navigation
applications over Europe via GEO satellites. The
service will be declared operational in 2024 and will
enable safe operations in ocean waters, harbour
entrances, harbour approaches and coastal waters
in line with the operational requirements included
in the IMO Resolution A.1046 and in waters of
the European Union Member States and EGNOS
contributing countries, offering a solution to
complement national DGPS services. ESMAS will
be freely accessible without any direct charge
and will be provided openly to suitably equipped
maritime users using both the GPS L1 C/A signal
and the SBAS L1 augmentation signal.
ASGARD Project - Operator-Centred Enhancement of Awareness in Navigation
The Advanced shipborne Galileo receiver DFMC (ASGARD) receiver is designed to leverage all
the advanced features of the Galileo Open Service (OS), benefiting from enhanced performance
and robustness through dual-frequency and OSNMA capabilities. This design ensures compliance
with the regulatory frameworks governing maritime equipment at both the European Union (EU)
and International Maritime Organization (IMO) levels. As part of the project, various activities
will be conducted to rigorously test and demonstrate the product's capabilities, facilitating the
dissemination and formulation of a business plan to maximize the adoption of shipborne Galileo
receivers in the relevant market.
The EU Maritime Security Strategy (EUMSS) is dedicated to advancing international peace, security
and ocean sustainability, aiming to ensure secure maritime operations. Despite its primary focus on
sea-related matters, the effectiveness of the EUMSS relies significantly on space technologies. This
includes leveraging Earth Observation data from Copernicus, the accurate positioning provided by
Galileo and EGNOS, as well as the secure communication capabilities of IRIS2 and GOVSATCOM.
More information available at: https://asgard.gmv.com/
IWETT- inland Waterway use of EGNOS for Tracking and Tracing
The IWETT project will achieve significant adoption of EGNOS in the inland waterway (IWW)
transport sector, namely on the Danube in Hungary, on the Spree-Oder Waterway in Germany and on
the Guadalquivir river in Spain. In these three countries, the authorities and organisations responsible
for IWW information systems and services decided to execute final pilot tests and, after validation, use
the EGNOS based service as an important part of their River Information Services (RIS) system.
IWETT will contribute to EGNOS adoption in IWW by implementing/upgrading the EGNOS based
infrastructure in the three selected areas. A special IWW user terminal concept (INAV concept)
will be elaborated and tested by the German responsible authority (WSV). The project ultimately
seeks to bridge the gap between existing technologies and the adoption of advanced EGNOS-based
systems, leading to more reliable, accurate, and comprehensive RIS.
EGNOS improves the accuracy and reliability of GNSS positioning information, while also providing a
crucial integrity message regarding the continuity and availability of a signal. The use of EGNOS as a
source of differential corrections provides room for the rationalisation of the shore infrastructures by
reducing onsite infrastructure as well as operational and maintenance costs.
More information available at: https://iwett.eu/
Copernicus Services
Sentinels
Terminology used on this page is explained in Annex 2 for both GNSS and EO performance parameters.
Marine
CMEMS
Security
CSS
Land
CLMS
Sentinel-1 Sentinel-2
Sentinel-3 Sentinel-6
Search and
Rescue service
High accuracy
service
SAR Return
Link
More robust
positioning
Higher
Accuracy
Integrity
Information
Authentication
Open Service
features
Multi-
frequency
EGNOS
GalileoGalileo
MARITIME AND INLAND WATERWAYS153EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
REFERENCE CHARTS
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
Revenue from GNSS device sales by region Revenue from GNSS device sales by application
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
0
300
600
900
1 200
1 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Port Operations
Collision Avoidance (AIS, VDES) Dark Vessel Monitoring
DredgingMarine Surveying and Mapping
Inland Waterways Navigation
Merchant Navigation Recreational navigation
Port Operations
Collision Avoidance (AIS, VDES) Dark Vessel Monitoring
DredgingMarine Surveying and Mapping
Inland Waterways Navigation
Merchant Navigation Recreational navigation
0
2 000
4 000
6 000
8 000
10 000
12 000
14 000
16 000
18 000
20 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
10 000
15 000
20 000
0
300
600
900
1 200
1 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Port Operations
Collision Avoidance (AIS, VDES) Dark Vessel Monitoring
DredgingMarine Surveying and Mapping
Inland Waterways Navigation
Merchant Navigation Recreational navigation
Port Operations
Collision Avoidance (AIS, VDES) Dark Vessel Monitoring
DredgingMarine Surveying and Mapping
Inland Waterways Navigation
Merchant Navigation Recreational navigation
0
2 000
4 000
6 000
8 000
10 000
12 000
14 000
16 000
18 000
20 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
10 000
15 000
20 000
0
300
600
900
1 200
1 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Port Operations
Collision Avoidance (AIS, VDES) Dark Vessel Monitoring
DredgingMarine Surveying and Mapping
Inland Waterways Navigation
Merchant Navigation Recreational navigation
Port Operations
Collision Avoidance (AIS, VDES) Dark Vessel Monitoring
DredgingMarine Surveying and Mapping
Inland Waterways Navigation
Merchant Navigation Recreational navigation
0
2 000
4 000
6 000
8 000
10 000
12 000
14 000
16 000
18 000
20 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
10 000
15 000
20 000
0
300
600
900
1 200
1 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Port Operations
Collision Avoidance (AIS, VDES) Dark Vessel Monitoring
DredgingMarine Surveying and Mapping
Inland Waterways Navigation
Merchant Navigation Recreational navigation
Port Operations
Collision Avoidance (AIS, VDES) Dark Vessel Monitoring
DredgingMarine Surveying and Mapping
Inland Waterways Navigation
Merchant Navigation Recreational navigation
0
2 000
4 000
6 000
8 000
10 000
12 000
14 000
16 000
18 000
20 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
10 000
15 000
20 000
154MARITIME AND INLAND WATERWAYS
REFERENCE CHARTS
Revenue from EO data sales by application
Revenue from EO services sales by application
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
€ (millions)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
Navigation through sea ice Ship route navigation Port safety
Port securityInland waterways navigation
Dark vessel monitoring Marine surveying and mapping Maritime pollution monitoring
Navigation through sea ice Ship route navigation Port safety
Port securityInland waterways navigation
Dark vessel monitoring Marine surveying and mapping Maritime pollution monitoring
€ (millions)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
€ (millions)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
Navigation through sea ice Ship route navigation Port safety
Port securityInland waterways navigation
Dark vessel monitoring Marine surveying and mapping Maritime pollution monitoring
Navigation through sea ice Ship route navigation Port safety
Port securityInland waterways navigation
Dark vessel monitoring Marine surveying and mapping Maritime pollution monitoring
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
Revenue from EO data sales by region
2033
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
2033
n monitoring
n monitoring
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
2033
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
2033
n monitoring
n monitoring
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
RAIL
RAIL
The rail sector plays a fundamental role in ensuring the efficient movement of goods and
passengers, connecting regions and offering a more sustainable transport solution. Major
stakeholders in the rail sector include government agencies responsible for transportation
and infrastructure management as well as private railway operators and manufacturers.
GNSS is key for the rail sector digitalisation. It is, in fact, widely used in non-safety
critical applications, from asset management to infrastructure monitoring and enhanced
passenger information. Moreover, a large number of initiatives are preparing for the
introduction of GNSS in High- and Low-Density Command & Control Systems, paving
the way for new train operations.
Both GNSS and EO-based solutions help ensure increased safety of railway infrastructure
(e.g. monitoring track deformation at network scale and assessing natural hazard risks)
while allowing reduced costs for on-site inspections. Continuous satellite-based monitoring
at network scale enables a paradigm shift to predictive maintenance, and already some
projects on ground motion for rail have reached the operational service level.
What you can read in this chapter
• Key trends: Satellite-based services increasingly present in railway operations.
• User perspective: The green and digital transition of the rail sector.
• Industry: Rail GNSS & EO value chains.
• Recent developments: New steps achieved in the roadmap towards the presence of
GNSS in railway applications.
• Future market evolutions: GNSS market is growing with the development of non-
safety and safety applications.
• European systems and projects: Railway stakeholders are ready to integrate EGNSS in
a wide selection of applications.
• Reference charts: Yearly evolution of installed base of GNSS devices and revenues by
application and region.
© iStock1 Asset management, Condition-based maintenance
and Predictive maintenance are non-safety related
applications relying on the position of fixed and
moving elements of the railway environment (from
the infrastructure to the track-side equipment, and
also rolling stock, wagons…). On the charts, these
applications are grouped under the name ‘asset
management’.
2 Used to monitor trackside vegetation, landslide and
track deformation.
Application descriptions can be found in Annex 3Attractiveness enhancement
• Passenger information systems
• Public Transport – Tram and Light RailTrain driving optimisation
• Asset management1
• Driver Advisory Systems (DAS)Maintenance improvement
• Condition-based maintenance1
• Infrastructure monitoring2
• Predictive maintenance1Safety related
• Enhanced Command & Control
Systems (CCS)
• Trackside personnel protection systemsLegend
EO application
GNSS application
Synergetic application
(combined use of EO and GNSS) 155
156RAIL
KEY TRENDS
An increasing number of rail freight wagons are equipped with telematics
including GNSS
EGNSS tracking devices are continuing to penetrate the freight market, with an increasing number of
trains and wagons equipped across Europe. These devices are part of the strategy to shift freight from
road to rail by enhancing its attractiveness.
Fleet operators develop digital freight services also by making wagons smarter, offering customers a
better visibility of the cargos and its conditions. Parameters such as temperature, pressure, estimated
time of arrival as well as accurate information of the transport itself are now provided – this includes
information on the location of the cars, loading status, open/close condition of doors and hatches and
health condition of bogies, braking system and wheelsets.
The total number of EGNSS tracking devices is estimated to be more than 200 000, and localised
reports on assets are now extensively exchanging millions of messages each day. While the technology
has reached maturity, the development of more services is continuing.
For example, the 4F French
coalition just launched
the MONITOR innovation
project, which aims to
support the development
of digital freight trains
by combining radio
communication between
wagons with brake and
bogie monitoring sensors
and automated brake
testing. The aim is to reduce
the risks of derailments and
untimely brake applications
and to reduce train
preparation time.
Enhanced infrastructure monitoring is now using AI for GNSS data processing
Infrastructure, track inspection and maintenance are essential tasks to ensure safe and efficient railway
operations. Increasingly, the monitoring of track geometry condition using equipped in-service trains is
linked with GNSS sensors and allows for precise measurements and accurate location identification.
These technological solutions, combined with AI, offer
valuable insights into predicting the emergence of
defects, enabling proactive intervention during the
initial stages of deterioration.
By implementing AI-driven automation, the railway
system gains enhanced flexibility in managing varying
peak travel times, mitigating operational disruptions
caused by maintenance and staffing issues.
Furthermore, this automation enables upgrades to
be carried out with minimal impact on rail services.
Consequently, passengers benefit from an improved
travel experience, as these advances optimise overall
efficiency and reliability.
Rail sector is recovering from COVID-19 impact and set for future growth
The rail sector has the potential to not only regain pre-pandemic passenger numbers but also expand
its market share. This aligns with the growing consumer demand for sustainability, as rail travel offers
a more environmentally friendly alternative to road and air transport. As new mobility options emerge,
car usage for short to medium distances is projected to decrease by 20% to 70% over the next decade,
creating an opportunity for rail to capture a larger share.
Additionally, various regions are actively modernising rail infrastructure and prioritising decarbonisation
efforts. Notably, the European Green Deal, as a comprehensive sustainability initiative, aims to invest
almost €90 billion in rail-related infrastructure upgrades.
The modernisation of the railway system includes the adoption of GNSS-based technologies; their
introduction into signaling applications is increasing in Europe and could represent a major change in
future markets.
Satellite-based services are increasingly present in railway operations
Key market trends
• An increasing number of rail freight wagons are equipped with EGNSS tracking devices enabling more digital freight services
• Enhanced infrastructure monitoring using AI for GNSS data processing is enabling proactive intervention during the initial stages of infrastructure deterioration
• The Rail sector is recovering from the COVID-19 impact and is bound for future growth and continuous modernisation of railways systems, including GNSS-based technologies
© iStock
© iStock
RAIL157EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
USER PERSPECTIVE
The green and digital transition of the Rail sector
Sources of key EO and GNSS user requirements
The key EO and GNSS user requirements for the different application groups within the rail segment are, at EU level, collected using a harmonised procedure.
Information is collected through extensive interactions with user groups, providers and experts in a continuous process culminating at the User Consultation Platforms (UCP).
All relevant requirements are documented in detail and updated regularly within the Report on Rail and Public Transport user needs and requirements. User requirements for
Earth Observation (EO) services and products – as well as their evolution – are now also collected through the UCP. The process covers the EO user needs and requirements of
commercial users based on inputs from industry experts and user groups, mirroring the existing process implemented for GNSS. EO requirements are covered starting from the
2024 issue of the Rail report.
Moreover, the collection of specific requirements for Copernicus services and products is supported by an integrated process that involves different channels: (i) dedicated
studies (e.g. "NEXTSPACE" project, "Copernicus for EC (C4EC)" study, Commission Staff Working Document on user needs), (ii) targeted consultations organised by the European
Commission or the Entrusted entities with the relevant communities, (iii) regular and structured exchanges among representatives of the Copernicus governance structure and
Member States through the Copernicus User Forum.
The importance of a modal shift towards the twin transition
A modal shift to rail is imperative for reducing the environmental impact caused by transportation.
To achieve this, innovation and digitalisation are key and come in two main forms.
Firstly, for freight rail operations, competitiveness can be improved by a seamlessly integration
into the logistics value chain, thereby strengthening the railway's role in the supply industry.
Secondly, a comprehensive digital transformation, encompassing the automation of operations,
can enhance overall performance and capacity in the rail sector.
Transformative innovations are expected from the new European partnership on rail research
and innovation, named Europe’s Rail. The partnership has defined different priorities where
digitalisation plays important roles, including digital and automated train operations; the
development of a competitive digital green rail freight and development of sustainable and digital
assets.
Research and innovation along these priorities is expected to transform the rail sector providing
truly customer-centric services, where mobility solutions fulfil passenger and logistic expectations,
reducing costs, improving performance and creating immediate customer satisfaction.
Competitive digital green, automated train operations and rail freight contribute to the impacts
presented in the figure below.
Meeting
evolving
customer
requirements
Improved
performance
and capacity
Reduced
costs Harmonised
approach to
evolution
and greater
adaptability
Reinforced
role for rail
in European
transport
and mobility
Improved EU
rail supply
industry
competitive-
ness
More
sustainable
and resilient
transport
Towards network scale rail infrastructure monitoring with satellite and drone
EO, GNSS
Safety of rail operations is the main concern for rail companies and must be ensured at large-scale
networks comprising varied topographies, geological and climatic conditions.
The research and development project SIA developed low-cost EGNSS solutions for providing
prognostic information on the health status of the railway assets. The project delivered a low-
cost, real-time monitoring system using EGNSS localisation techniques providing high accuracy
and high availability in the railway environment. The data collected feeds into infrastructure
degradation models and predictive algorithms. In terms of added value offered, the new services
developed are expected to reduce railway maintenance costs by 15%, maintenance costs linked
to unscheduled events by 25% and the derailments associated to the rail-wheel interface by 15%.
The use of satellite imagery offers a valuable tool for authorities and infrastructure managers
to identify crucial factors at network scale such as vegetation levels and their proximity to the
rail tracks and ground deformation and subsidence. The latter should be managed to ensure
the smooth and safe operation of rail systems, maintaining the reliability of rail travel. When it
comes to monitoring ground stability at network scale, the large set of in-situ sensors necessary
means that local scale remote sensing methods (e.g. LiDAR) may be too expensive due to the
requirement to establish extensive measuring networks. By leveraging EO imagery, proactive
measures can be taken to address issues concerning the infrastructure at a large scale before
escalating, ensuring the smooth functioning of rail operations.
Drones can also provide a cheaper alternative compared with traditional monitoring methods,
in particular combined with GNSS and AI, leading to improved maintenance, increased
operational efficiency, and enhanced safety in the rail sector. Rail infrastructure managers such
as SNCF Reseau and DB are already using drones to assist their monitoring and maintenance
activities.
© Europe’s Rail Joint Undertaking Master Plan
158RAIL
• ALSTOM TRANSPORT*
• AZD PRAHA*
• CAF*
• CATERPILLAR
• CRRC CORPORATION
• HITACHI
• HUPAC*
• JAPAN RADIO CO.
• KAWASAKI
• KINTETSU RAILCAR
ENGINEERING
• MERCITALIA RAIL*
• MITSUBISHI
• SICE*
• SIEMENS*
• THALES*
• TRANSWAGGON*
• VTG*
• WABTEC
• XIAMEN YAXON NETWORK
• ANALOG DEVICES
• ANTCOM
• BEIJING BDSTAR NAVIGATION
• BROADCOM
• COMNAV TECHNOLOGY
• CORE CORPORATION
• GLARUN TECHNOLOGY
• GMV*
• HITACHI
• INTERMODAL TELEMATICS*
• LANNER ELECTRONICS
• MERMEC*
• PANORAMA ANTENNAS*
• SATEL*
• SEPTENTRIO*
• SIERRA WIRELESS
• SYNTONY GNSS*
• TE CONNECTIVITY*
• TRIMBLE NAVIGATION
• U-BLOX*
• YAGEO
TRAIN AND FREIGHT OPERATING
COMPANIES:
• ARRIVA*
• COLAS*
• DB*
• RENFE*
• SBB*
• SNCF*
• STAGECOACH*
• TRENITALIA*
• URBAN TRANSPORT OPERATORS
ROLLING STOCK OPERATING
COMPANIES:
• CONSORTIA
• INVESTMENT BANKS
• NATIONAL COMPANIES
• ALSTOM TRANSPORT*
• CAF*
• CRRC CORPORATION
• HITACHI
• SIEMENS*
• STADLER RAIL*
• WABTEC
• ADIF*
• DB NETZE*
• INFRAESTRUTURAS DE
PORTUGAL*
• NETWORK RAIL*
• RFI*
• SBB BAHNINFRASTRUKTUR*
• SNCF RÉSEAU*
• URBAN TRANSPORT OPERATORS
COMPONENTS AND
RECEIVER
MANUFACTURERS
SYSTEM
INTEGRATORS TRAIN MANUFACTURERS INFRASTRUCTURE
MANAGERS
RAILWAY UNDERTAKINGS
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in GNSS downstream activities.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 23 for a comprehensive description of the GNSS value chain and how to interpret it at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the company, though the actual area of activity might be wider.
Rail GNSS Value Chain1
European2 GNSS industry in the global arena
Looking at components and receivers manufacturers and system integrators in the rail
industry, Europe, North America and Asia continue to largely dominate the market with
European companies representing around a quarter of the market in 2021. Focusing on
system integrators, their market share is distributed consistently among the primary regional
players, with Europe retaining around one third of the global market share. Top European
players in the segment include Alstom Transport, Siemens and Thales.
INDUSTRY
GNSS
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
RAIL159EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
INDUSTRY
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in EO downstream activities. Please note that enterprises listed in the data providers step of the value chain often
provide platforms as a service. For the sake of simplicity the data providers are not repeated in other stages of the value chain in which they are active.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 13 for a comprehensive description of the EO value chain and how to interpret it at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the company, though the actual area of activity might be wider.
Rail EO Value Chain1
European2 EO industry in the global arena
The EO rail market is currently dominated by Asia-Pacific, which accounts for close
to half of the market share. Beijing Supermap is the leading EO transportation
service and solution provider globally. Europe follows closely behind, with Leonardo
(e-GEOS) being the largest European company in this segment.
Rail is currently the smallest market segment when it comes to EO applications.
However, many of the EO applications in the infrastructure segment overlap with
those applicable to rail.
END USERS
INFORMATION
PROVIDERS
EO PRODUCTS
AND SERVICE
PROVIDERS
PLATFORM
PROVIDERS
INFRASTRUCTURE
PROVIDERS
DATA PROVIDERS
• AIRBUS*
• BLACKSKY
• CAPELLA SPACE
• CGSTL
• E-GEOS*
• GEOSAT*
• ICEYE*
• MAXAR
• PLANET
• SATELLOGIC
• UMBRA
• AWS
• CLOUDFERRO*
• GOOGLE CLOUD
PLATFORM
• IBM CLOUD
• MICROSOFT AZURE
• T-SYSTEMS*
• CLOUDEO*
• CREODIAS*
• EARTH-I
• EURODATACUBE*
• GOOGLE EARTH ENGINE
• NORTH.IO*
• OPEN DATA CUBE
• OPENEO*
• PLANET EXPLORER
• (SINERGISSENTINEL-
HUBE)*
• UP42*
• BEIJING SUPERMAP
SOFTWARE
• CBC GEOSPATIAL
• E-GEOS*
• DARES TECHNOLOGY*
• DETEKTIA*
• GAF*
• GEOFEM*
• INTERMAP TECHNOLOGIES
• LIVEEO*
• PLANETEK*
• SATSENSE*
• SNC-LAVALIN
• SPOTLITE*
• TRE ALTAMIRA*
• ALTAMETRIS*
• SNC-LAVALIN
• ADIF*
• DB NETZE*
• INFRAESTRUTURAS DE
PORTUGAL*
• NETWORK RAIL*
• RFI*
• SBB
BAHNINFRASTRUKTUR*
• SNCF RÉSEAU*
• URBAN TRANSPORT
OPERATORS
• ALOS-2 (JAXA)
• COPERNICUS SENTINELS*
• COSMO-SKYMED (ASI)*
• RADARSAT (CSA)
• RELEVANT IN-SITU
NETWORKS
• OTHER RELEVANT
EUROPEAN NATIONAL
MISSIONS
• FEDERATED
INFRASTRUCTURE
(E.G. GAIA-X)*
• SENTINEL COLLABORATIVE
GROUND SEGMENT*
• WEKEO*
• COPERNICUS EUROPEAN
GROUND MONITORING
SYSTEM (EGMS)*
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
EARTH
OBSERVATION
160RAIL
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
New steps achieved in the roadmap towards the presence of GNSS
in railway applications
The annual shipments for GNSS receivers across the different rail applications have grown from more
than 25 000 in 2012 to over 250 000 units in 2022. This trend was primarily driven by the overall
digitalisation of railway assets, with GNSS data playing a crucial role in enabling this transformation. Asset
management devices account for around 70% of these shipments. Asset management solutions allow the
fleet performance to be assessed and the use of locomotives and railway cars to be optimised.
GNSS devices have been implemented into CCS applications since 2016, resulting in a steady growth
over the past few years. While the market in 2012 was not yet mature, in 2022 shipments reached more
than 30 000 units, making it the second largest application with almost 15% of total shipments of GNSS
devices.
Rail users are driving the need for widespread passenger information systems, which are providing the
information about the location, speed or arrival time of the train. With more than 20 000 shipments in
2022, this application is the third largest in terms of annual sales and accounts for 10% of total shipments.
GNSS for precision mapping in railway applications
In a rapidly digitalising world, the railway sector’s infrastructure
mapping needs are evolving at an unprecedented pace. Maps are key
for infrastructure management, digital twins and travel information
systems. They will also enable automatic train operations, especially
in future driverless applications, and facilitate track and catenary
maintenance.
Moreover, maps will also act as a key enabler for automatic train operations related to the track
axes and virtual or physical balises, light signals or markers, so that these can be integrated in
a multisensor localisation system. Digital maps will enable and optimise current and future rail
applications, which guarantee a safe and optimised rail traffic.
The RAILGAP H2020 project will contribute to the development of such maps, defining AI
algorithms for detecting and localising railway assets starting from LIDAR and Camera point clouds.
EO for track measurements to predict ground movements
Europe’s railway tracks are surrounded with all types of land cover such as forests, mountains,
buildings and agricultural crop fields. Changing moisture levels in the soil or floods can impact
the railway infrastructure – as the ground dries out or becomes saturated with water, it becomes
prone to land subsidence possibly displacing rail tracks. Thus, measuring the soil moisture is a key
activity of railway infrastructure managers to prevent damage and ensure safe and continuous
activity on the tracks. Over the past few decades, several in-situ techniques have been developed to
locally measure soil moisture such as gravimetric, time domain reflectometry (TDR) and frequency
domain reflectometry (FDR). However, they have a low spatial representation and cannot capture
soil moisture distribution across broader regions.
Advancements in EO technology aim to improve these field measurements, allowing for monitoring
at enhanced temporal and spatial resolutions, and at a significantly reduced cost. The Copernicus
programme is leading the way in this domain. For example, the EO4Infrastructure project aimed
to develop specific EO applications to support rail infrastructure
planning and monitoring. In the project framework, SNCF, along
with RFI and DB NETZE, have developed medium resolution
change detection maps that provide a weekly analysis of changes
occurred over a specific land cover. Based on the monitoring of
the Normalised Difference Water Index and fed into an update of
the land cover map after a year of monitoring, it helped reduce
the risk of damaged infrastructure, saving time and cost of
labour-intensive manual ground measurements.
Towards a EGNSS-based safety service
EUSPA is driving a roadmap towards the adoption of EGNSS in signalling applications. Recent EGNSS-R and IMPRESS mission studies contributed to close the gap of the technological readiness, by helping
to define the European GNSS Navigation Safety Service for Rail. Starting with the identification of the operational requirements, then translated into a user-level integrity concept, the two studies covered an
EGNSS-based safety service that enables continuous train localisation for safety-critical applications. Additional information about the project can be found at the following links for EGNSS-R and IMPRESS.
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Trackside personnel protection systems Public Transport - Tram and Light Rail
Driver Advisory Systems (DAS) Passenger Information Systems
Asset Management Enhanced Command & Control Systems (CCS)
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
Trackside personnel protection systems Public Transport - Tram and Light Rail
Driver Advisory Systems (DAS) Passenger Information Systems
Asset Management Enhanced Command & Control Systems (CCS)
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
© Network Rail
© voestalpine
RAIL161EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
GNSS market is growing with the development of non-safety and safety
applications
The global number of shipments of GNSS rail receivers is expected to rise from more than 300 000
units in 2023 to over 850 000 in 2033, mostly driven by the further growth of asset management
solutions, which will account for the vast majority of shipments. Beyond asset management applications,
driver advisory systems are expected to grow in the coming years, and account for most of the remailing
market together with enhanced command and control systems and passenger information systems.
From a regional perspective, these shipments are mainly driven by North America and Asia-Pacific
(each owning one third of the market) with EU27 being the third with a share of about 20%. This trend is
supported by the expected ambitious expansion and digitalisation of railway networks in these regions.
By 2033, Asia-Pacific is expected to increase its share to 35%, slowly increasing its relative share vis-a-
vis North America and EU27. Asia-Pacific is forecast to reach sales of more than 300,000 units.
Despite only accounting for a marginal share of global shipments, Africa and the Middle East together
with South America and the Caribbean are expected to triple their annual shipments of GNSS receivers.
However, this last trend highlights the structural divide of rail development across the globe.
From trackside centric to train centric signalling
Since 2012, EUSPA has supported the railway industry, infrastructure managers and railway
undertakings to adopt EGNSS and EGNOS for complex signalling applications, as well as
integrating GNSS within the evolution of European Rail Traffic Management System (ERTMS).
In the past few years, the European Railway Agency (ERA) has recognised the train-borne
localisation function based on satellite positioning as a game changer, while the European
Parliament in its recently adopted resolution on railway safety and signalling from July 2021 called
for a joint effort towards the introduction of GNSS in the ERTMS, based on the anticipation that
allowing a shift of the localisation function from trackside to on-board will result in a deployment
and maintenance cost reduction, as well as in a faster ERTMS roll-out and enhancing of the
ERTMS competitiveness outside the EU.
Different architectures are planned to be further demonstrated in an ERTMS context in the
FA2 programme from Europe’s rail and the R2DATO project. GNSS will also be part of the
development of alternative innovative solutions needed to revitalise capillary lines and regional
rail services. These solutions, developed in the FP6 FUTURE project, will feed passenger and
freight traffic for the main/core network, ensuring the link to other public transport services and
to first and last mile services.
More information available at:
https://projects.rail-research.europa.eu/eurail-fp6/
The role of EGNOS in the development of a common architecture for GNSS
based solutions in signaling
Through different programs funded by EUSPA, ESA, and notably Europe’s Rail, GNSS-based
localisation units are under development, relying on the use of multiple sensors such as IMUs,
digital maps or odometers. These units will take advantage of tailored GNSS services for railway
safety-relevant applications, which are currently being defined.
The development of the architecture is progressing well in terms of design, test and evaluation.
The success of the demonstrations, scheduled in the coming years in the frame of the Europe’s
Rail program, is a prerequisite for GNSS inclusion within the future evolution of ERTMS.
EGNOS was therefore pointed out as critical for the success of the demonstrations – the rail sector
is now expecting from the space programme the delivery of an experimental EGNOS service for
rail to enable a large scale demonstrator at the horizon of 2025 in Europe’s rail activities.
The EGNOS for rail demonstrator, whose development activities shall start shortly, will be
designed on the basis of the rail sector needs, with the underlying integrity concept relying on
EGNSS integrity services at pseudo-range level and additional specific GNSS integrity parameters
required by the usage of Kalman filtering, errors models and Fault Detection and Exclusion models.
0
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Trackside personnel protection systems Public Transport - Tram and Light Rail
Driver Advisory Systems (DAS) Passenger Information Systems
Asset Management Enhanced Command & Control Systems (CCS)
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
2
(CCS)
Shipments of GNSS devices by region
162RAIL
EUROPEAN SYSTEMS AND PROJECTS
Railway stakeholders are ready to integrate EGNSS in a wide selection
of applications
EGNOS for RAIL
Thanks to the engagement of the railway
undertakings, infrastructure managers and railway
industry, progress has been achieved in defining the
requirements for a potential EGNOS service in the
rail sector. These advances may enable the EU Space
Programme to create a new service that meets the
specific safety requirements of the railways.
A demonstration of achievable performances,
relying on EGNOS, enabling train localisation
for safety-critical applications needs to be
subsequently carried out within the framework
of Europe’s rail second phase to facilitate further
adoption of satellite-based localisation in ERTMS.
Possible future applications of OSNMA and HAS
Galileo OSNMA is a service supporting
navigation message authentication function
provided for Galileo OS signals, ensuring that
the information received is authentic and has
not been tampered with – i.e., it comes from
Galileo satellites and has not been modified
in any way. This can be particularly useful in
the rail sector for applications such as public
transportation ticketing and critical functions
like e-logistics, which require protection
against spoofing.
Galileo HAS will offer real-time improved user
positioning performances with a horizontal
accuracy at decimeter level. Several rail
related applications can benefit from Galileo
HAS, more specifically applications linked
to the rolling stock like asset management.
Galileo HAS could support for example
odometer calibration, shunting operations or
applications related to the rail infrastructure
monitoring and condition-based maintenance,
such as infrastructure surveying including
gauging surveys.
High accuracy
service
Better
Availability
More robust
positioning
Higher
Accuracy
Redundancy
Authentication
Open Service
features
Multi-
frequency
Integrity
GalileoGalileo
EGNOS
EUSPA supports research and innovation through H2020 and Horizon
Europe grants to reach readiness of EGNSS integration in rail
The European Union has positioned rail as the backbone of people and goods transportation in
the Union. The EU Space Programme and its components support rail operations and increase
passenger safety. The CLUG Project (2019-2023) assessed the design of a "Certifiable
Localisation Unit with GNSS in the railway environment”, a failsafe on-board multi-sensor
localisation unit using GNSS and EGNOS that will be interoperable across the entire European
railway network. A follow-up project, CLUG 2.0, is ongoing to advance the development of the
solution and to achieve a reliable demonstration of performance.
More information available at: https://clugproject.eu/ and https://www.clug2.eu/
The RAILGAP project (2020-2024) contributes to the roadmap for the application of new
technologies in railway systems, developing methodologies and tools, for the evaluation and
assessment of new, or enhanced, on-board signalling systems. These comprise a Ground
Truth and a Digital Map which are not yet available with the required quality and performance
attributes.
More information available at: https://railgap.eu/
Two EUSPA Fundamental Elements projects support the development
of rail-compatible receivers
The TRENI project, led by Thales Alenia Space, is developing a railway GNSS receiver and antenna
(TRL7) for use within a safe train positioning platform. The Galileo-based solution intends to be
robust and capable of identifying failures, detect and mitigate interferences and spoofing.
More information available at: https://it.linkedin.com/in/treni-project
GALITS (GAlileo Localisation In Train Signalling), led by Qascom, is developing an innovative,
flexible and customisable GNSS receiver and antenna. It intends to provide a cost-efficient
solution for the train control system integrators.
Both consortia develop a DFMC GNSS receiver for safety-related railway applications designed
to be integrated with additional sensors and compatible with on-board train control systems for
various applications (i.e. the Virtual Balise concept for ERTMS, and absolute train positioning).
More information available at:
http://www.radiolabs.it/en/galits/
Terminology used on this page is explained in Annex 2 for both GNSS and EO performance parameters.
© iStock
RAIL163EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
REFERENCE CHARTS
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
Revenue from GNSS device sales by region Revenue from GNSS device sales by application
Installed base of GNSS devices sales by application
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
Trackside personnel protection systems Public Transport - Tram and Light Rail
Driver Advisory Systems (DAS) Passenger Information Systems
Asset Management Enhanced Command & Control Systems (CCS)
Trackside personnel protection systems Public Transport - Tram and Light Rail
Driver Advisory Systems (DAS) Passenger Information Systems
Asset Management Enhanced Command & Control Systems (CCS)
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS device sales by application
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
Trackside personnel protection systems Public Transport - Tram and Light Rail
Driver Advisory Systems (DAS) Passenger Information Systems
Asset Management Enhanced Command & Control Systems (CCS)
Trackside personnel protection systems Public Transport - Tram and Light Rail
Driver Advisory Systems (DAS) Passenger Information Systems
Asset Management Enhanced Command & Control Systems (CCS)
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS device sales by application
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
Trackside personnel protection systems Public Transport - Tram and Light Rail
Driver Advisory Systems (DAS) Passenger Information Systems
Asset Management Enhanced Command & Control Systems (CCS)
Trackside personnel protection systems Public Transport - Tram and Light Rail
Driver Advisory Systems (DAS) Passenger Information Systems
Asset Management Enhanced Command & Control Systems (CCS)
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS device sales by application
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
Trackside personnel protection systems Public Transport - Tram and Light Rail
Driver Advisory Systems (DAS) Passenger Information Systems
Asset Management Enhanced Command & Control Systems (CCS)
Trackside personnel protection systems Public Transport - Tram and Light Rail
Driver Advisory Systems (DAS) Passenger Information Systems
Asset Management Enhanced Command & Control Systems (CCS)
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS device sales by application
ROAD AND AUTOMOTIVE
ROAD AND AUTOMOTIVE
Transport and mobility play a key role in today's world. The road and automotive market
segment encompasses services and products involving not only the automotive industry,
but also a range of service providers connected to mobility, logistics and the road
transport network.
GNSS is used widely in roads across multiple applications. The GNSS applications can
be categorised as safety related, where positioning information is used either to support
safety-critical operations (e.g. connected and automated cars) or to support emergency
assistance services such as eCall, liability and enforcement related (such as road user
charging, smart tachographs), and asset management, where GNSS positioning is used
to manage several types of vehicle assets and related operations.
In smart mobility applications, both GNSS and satellite imagery contribute to making
mobility smarter, greener and more efficient thanks not only to navigation services for
drivers, but also the collection and distribution of traffic information and the provision of
contextual information to improve the driving experience.
The relevance of space for transport infrastructure: one of the enablers of mobility,
transport and logistics is the transport infrastructure where space-based technologies
have a role to play. GNSS empowers a range of different traffic management services,
while EO supports the planning, design, construction and monitoring of the road
infrastructure. This application is covered and quantified in the infrastructure segment.
Go to page 123 for more information.
The role of HD maps: HD Maps represent an enabler for connected and automated
driving, as they provide detailed information on the environment, necessary for
determining driving instructions to automated vehicles. HD maps are a relevant space-
enabled application because the basic layer of HD maps is derived from satellite imagery.
Moreover, GNSS (absolute) positioning is used to locate the vehicle in such maps. In this
edition of the Market Report, players active in HD maps are included in the analysis, but
the application is not quantified.
What you can read in this chapter
• Key trends: The automotive industry recovers, urban mobility and automation push GNSS.
• User perspective: Users need performance, safety and security while keeping costs
under control.
• Industry: Road and automotive value chains.
• Recent developments: In-vehicle systems, insurance telematics and emergency
assistance pushed GNSS growth.
• Future market evolution: Growing automotive market, automation and smart mobility
will boost GNSS sales.
• European systems and projects: HAS and OSNMA support more safe and secure road
transport.
• Reference charts: Yearly evolution of installed base of GNSS devices and revenues as
well as EO revenues by application and region.
164 © iStock1 Used by commercial vehicles, for dangerous goods
tracking, by taxis, rental cars and car sharing.
2 Supports automated driving for SAE levels 4 and 5.
3 Portable navigation devices (PNDs) and in-vehicle
systems (IVS) built in cars support turn-by-turn
navigation. Moreover, IVS support any location-based
inputs for Advanced Driver Assistance Systems
(ADAS) (SAE levels 2 and 3).Application descriptions can be found in Annex 3Safety related
• Connected and Automated
Driving (CAD)2
• Emergency assistanceSmart mobility
• Congestion control
• Infotainment services
• Navigation (IVS & PND)3Liability and enforcement
• Insurance telematics
• Road User Charging (RUC)
• Smart tachographAsset management
• Bike sharing
• Public transport - buses
• Road asset management1Legend
EO application
GNSS application
Synergetic application
(combined use of EO and GNSS)
ROAD AND AUTOMOTIVE165EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
KEY TRENDS
The automotive industry is rapidly evolving to meet the safety and
sustainability challenges faced by transport and mobility
The automotive industry, after experiencing the disruptions to supply chains due to the COVID-19
pandemic, is undergoing a restart. Even though geopolitical issues and shortages in the supply of the
rare materials used in the semiconductors still affect the industry, all major car-producing European
nations booked year-on-year growth in production in 2022. The industry's focus on electrification is
more significant than ever, driving innovations in electric vehicle manufacturing.
Smart cities are embracing this wave of change, investing heavily in connected multimodality and
electric infrastructure to manage these new forms of transport and promote seamless, sustainable
travel experiences. This revolution in urban mobility is being fundamentally shaped by green deal
efforts and traffic optimisation objectives, leading to a seismic shift in the ownership paradigm.
The emphasis on sustainability and efficiency has given rise to new business models such as Mobility-
as-a-Service (MaaS), Logistics-as-a-Service (LaaS), and Transportation-as-a-Service (TaaS), creating a
shared, integrated and on-demand ecosystem for urban transport and mobility.
The efforts of the industry and the features of new models launched on the market show that there is an
undeniable momentum in the development of vehicle connectivity and automation, also supported by
the progress of legislation, which recognises the potential of connected, cooperative and automated
mobility for increased safety and – combined with electrification – higher sustainability. Together, these
transformations are shaping the future of automotive, directing us towards a safer, greener, and more
integrated mobility and transport landscape.
Shared rides and electric micro mobility changing the future of urban transit
and uptake of GNSS tech
Cities worldwide are actively addressing the issues
stemming from the movement of people and goods,
caused by increased urbanisation and concentration of
people and economic activities in cities.
Novel mobility options are helping cities to become
more liveable and greener. Micromobility solutions, such
as scooters and e-bikes, as well as ridesharing, have been
gaining traction. Their uptake will reduce CO2 emissions,
due to the lower number of vehicles on the roads, thanks
to fleet pooling, as well as the smaller average vehicle size.
In turn, the uptake of these novel solutions boosts the
market for asset management services that are required to
manage and monitor the assets. Moreover, micromobility,
combined with car sharing as well as traditional public
transport solutions, represents the mobility building
blocks of MaaS platforms. In MaaS, GNSS represents an
enabler on both sides of the business model, i.e. the user
and the vehicle.
The automotive industry recovers, urban mobility and automation push GNSS
Key market trends
• The automotive industry evolves in many directions to meet the demand for safer and more sustainable mobility and transport
• A range of micromobility solutions now complements traditional mobility and fuels Mobility-as-a-Service business models, enabled by GNSS for both user navigation and asset management
• Level 3 automated vehicles appeared at national level, while European safety regulations keep evolving, paving the way for level 4 automation
© hpgruesen (pixabay.com)
Level 3 automation just appeared at national level….
Based on the classification system defined by SAE (SAE J3016), the achievement of the third
level of automation marks a substantial technological jump in the path to full automation of
driving. From level 3 (L3) onwards, you are not driving – the system will.
The necessary conditions to allow the first operations of L3 at national level have been achieved.
In May 2022, Mercedes-Benz became the world’s first manufacturer to obtain the certification by
the German transport authorities for legal operation of its L3 Drive Pilot on the country’s public
roads. This was followed by a later announcement for certification of L3 use in the US State of
Nevada.
….While European safety regulations lead the way for level 4 automation
On 15 September 2022, a milestone in automated vehicle regulation was reached with the Commission
Implementing Regulation 2022/1426. The provision of procedures and technical specifications for
the type approval of the automated driving system (ADS) of fully automated vehicles in the EU is a
fundamental enabler for the deployment of L4 automation.
While this regulation is applicable to small series production, the EU aims to develop requirements
for whole vehicle type approval of fully automated vehicles produced in unlimited series by July 2024.
The scope of the regulation shows use cases that will benefit from using GNSS, including fully
automated vehicles and hub-to-hub for predefined routes.
166ROAD AND AUTOMOTIVE
USER PERSPECTIVE
Sources of key EO and GNSS user requirements
The key EO and GNSS user requirements for the different application
groups within the road and automotive segment are collected using
a harmonised procedure at EU level.
Information is collected through extensive interactions with user
groups, providers and experts in a continuous process culminating
at the User Consultation Platforms (UCP). All relevant requirements
are documented in detail and updated regularly within the Report
on Road and Automotive and Public Transport. User requirements
for Earth Observation (EO) services and products – as well as their
evolution – are now also collected through the UCP. The process
covers the EO user needs and requirements of commercial users
based on inputs from industry experts and user groups, mirroring
the existing process implemented for GNSS. EO requirements are
covered starting from the 2024 issue of the Road and Automotive
report.
Moreover, the collection of specific requirements for Copernicus
services and products is supported by an integrated process that
involves different channels: (i) dedicated studies (e.g. "NEXTSPACE"
project, "Copernicus for EC (C4EC)" study, Commission Staff
Working Document on user needs); (ii) targeted consultations
organised by the European Commission or the entrusted entities
with the relevant communities; (iii) regular and structured exchanges
among representatives of the Copernicus governance structure and
Member States through the Copernicus User Forum.
Users need performance, safety and security while keeping costs under control
Road infrastructure planning, construction and monitoring facilitated by Earth
Observation
Monitoring of road network and adjacent areas is essential along the whole infrastructure
lifecycle – from site selection, design, planning, construction to operation and maintenance.
Geohydrological conditions and hazards are monitored and forecasted for tactical construction
and maintenance decisions. Decadal climate forecasts are needed to design resilient infrastructure
with just the right performance and safety margins so as not to waste resources limit the impact
on climate.
Earth Observation offers a viable and effective solution. In particular, the use of SAR images
from EO satellites to support SAR interferometry (InSAR) techniques, allows potential risks
connected to ground instability, landslides, subsidence, and deformation of road surfaces to be
identified.
Copernicus has a significant role: data from Sentinel-1, together with other satellite imagery
and data from other sensors, is used by service providers to support solutions offering regular
monitoring, alert services as well as decision-making support systems to various stakeholders,
including road authorities and operators, civil protection agencies and maintenance teams.
Thanks to EO-based services, the final users are then able to assess the present exposure
of assets to climate risks, as well as the expected exposure evolution. It is the case of the
the Italian Road Authority, ANAS, which uses EO services for ground displacement assessment
during road design and construction, as well as for the regular monitoring of bridges and viaducts.
Performance requirements of automated vehicles drive the evolution
of robust high precision services for automotive
With the advent of automated driving, automakers are increasingly dependent on precise and
high-performance positioning technologies. Automated vehicles need to rely on instant, robust
and accurate positioning (up to decimetre level), available at all times and in all operational
environments.
To achieve this, the architecture of positioning engines of vehicles is based on the data fusion
paradigm – inputs from inertial measurement units (IMUs), and sensors such as cameras, radar
and LiDAR are used. Among the different sensors, GNSS enables, thanks to absolute positioning,
ubiquitous and accurate contextual awareness within the road network.
The need for high accuracy and availability has created a market need for novel correction
services offering up to centimetre-level accuracy and wide coverage and availability. Moreover,
driven by user needs, captured in the safety-related requirements of the automated driving
standards (e.g. ISO 26262), the industry has also started to offer integrity as part of their PVT
solutions.
Finally, the importance of GNSS positioning is being leveraged by key industry players to challenge
the traditional paradigm of the industry. Whereas GNSS players have historically covered the
role of Tier 2 suppliers, they are now signing strategic partnerships directly with OEMs.
Road positioning applications to benefit from improved signal security
Road applications such as road user charging, smart tachograph, insurance telematics, asset
management and automated driving all need to ensure position security, either to prevent frauds
or to preserve the robustness of safety-of-life operations. Among potential threats, spoofing is a
sophisticated form of interfering with and falsifying satellite navigation signals.
Authenticating the satellite navigation signals and data can assure the receiving users that the
signal is coming from a trusted source and is correct.
The forthcoming Galileo Open Service – Navigation Message Authentication (OSNMA) is an
authentication mechanism that allows users of the Open Service to ascertain the validity of
GNSS data, thereby ensuring that the information they receive is genuinely from Galileo and
remains unaltered in any form.
Receiver manufacturers have already started implementing OSNMA anti-spoofing security in
their high-precision receivers ready for mass market in road applications.
ROAD AND AUTOMOTIVE167EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
INDUSTRY
• AISIN
• AVAGO TECHNOLOGIES
• BEIJING BDSTAR NAVIGATION
• CADENCE DESIGN SYSTEMS
• FURUNO
• GARMIN
• HEXAGON*
• HITACHI
• HIRSCHMANN*
• JAPAN RADIO CO.
• KATHREIN-WERKE*
• LAIRD*
• MEDIATEK
• NIHON DEMPA KOGYO
• NUVOTON TECHNOLOGY
• NXP SEMICONDUCTORS*
• ORBCOMM
• QUALCOMM
• SIERRA WIRELESS
• STMICROELECTRONICS*
• TE CONNECTIVITY*
• TRIMBLE NAVIGATION
• U-BLOX*
• YAGEO
• ZHEIJANG JC
• ACTIA*
• ALPINE
• BOSCH*
• CONTINENTAL*
• DENSO
• FICOSA*
• GEMALTO (now part of THALES)
• PIONEER
• SIEMENS*
• STONERIDGE
• VALEO*
HD MAP PROVIDERS
• GOOGLE
• HERE*
• TOMTOM*
• MOBILE NETWORK OPERATORS:
• AIRTEL, AT&T, CHINA MOBILE,
T-MOBILE*, TELEFONICA*,
VODAFONE*
• TRAFFIC INFORMATION
PROVIDERS:
• GARMIN, GOOGLE, TOMTOM*
• ROAD TOLLING:
• KAPSCH*, MHIESA, NTPS*,
SATELLIC*, SIEMENS*, SKY TOLL*,
TOLL COLLECT*
• AUGMENTATION SERVICE
PROVIDERS
• U-BLOX*, HEXAGON*, SWIFT,
TOPCON, TRIMBLE
• CAR SHARING OPERATORS
• TELEMATICS SERVICE
PROVIDERS
• FUEL/FLEET CARD ISSUING
COMPANIES
• MAINTENANCE & DIAGNOSTICS
• GARMIN
• MAGNETI MARELLI*
• MICHELIN (MASTERNAUT)*
• OCTO TELEMATICS*
• TOMTOM*
• TRAKM8*
• WABCO
• BMW*
• CHANGAN GROUP
• CHERY
• DAIMLER*
• DONGFENG
• FAW GROUP
• FORD
• GEELY
• GM
• GREAT WALL
• HONDA
• HYUNDAI
• MAZDA MOTOR
• NISSAN
• RENAULT*
• SAIC MOTOR
• SUBARU
• STELLANTIS*
• SUZUKI
• TATA MOTORS
• TESLA
• TOYOTA
• VOLKSWAGEN*
• CAR OWNERS
• COMERCIAL VEHICLES DRIVERS
• ENFORCERS
• FLEET OPERATORS
• INSURANCE COMPANIES
• MEMBER STATES
• ROAD NETWORK OPERATORS
COMPONENTS
AND RECEIVER
MANUFACTURERS
TIER 1
SUPPLIERS
VEHICLE
MANUFACTURERS USERS
AFTERMARKET AND
DEVICE VENDORS
SERVICE PROVIDERS
Road and Automotive GNSS Value Chain1
System Integrators
European2 GNSS industry
in the global arena
With ST Microelectronics, u-Blox
and Hexagon, European companies
hold three of the five top spots of the
components & receiver manufacturers
market, where Europe is the main
player with around 40% of the global
market.
When it comes to system integrators,
Europe accounts for over a third of
global revenues. Bosch, Continental
and Valeo are global leaders in the
Tier 1 segment of the industry, while
Volkswagen, Stellantis, Daimler, BMW
and Renault represent the largest
players of the global OEM arena.
GNSS
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in GNSS downstream activities.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 23 for a comprehensive description of the GNSS value chain and how to interpret them at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the company, though the actual area of activity might be wider.
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
168ROAD AND AUTOMOTIVE
INDUSTRY
Road and Automotive EO Value Chain1
European2 EO industry in the global arena
In 2021, whilst North America remains in a leading position with about two-thirds
of the global shares, Europe makes up almost 30% of the global market. The
dominating European company remains Leonardo (e-GEOS), followed by Airbus
and Avineon.
END USERS
INFORMATION
PROVIDERS
EO PRODUCTS
AND SERVICE
PROVIDERS
PLATFORM
PROVIDERS
INFRASTRUCTURE
PROVIDERS
DATA PROVIDERS
• AIRBUS*
• BLACKSKY
• CAPELLA SPACE
• CGSTL
• GEOSAT*
• E-GEOS*
• ICEYE*
• MAXAR
• PLANET
• SATELLOGIC
• UMBRA
MAP PROVIDERS:
APPLE, GOOGLE,
MAPQUEST,
MICROSOFT,
OPENSTREETMAP*,
OVERTURE MAPS*
HD MAP PROVIDERS:
GARMIN, HERE*, NAVINFO,
NVIDIA, TOMTOM*
• AWS
• CLOUDFERRO*
• GOOGLE CLOUD
PLATFORM
• IBM CLOUD
• MICROSOFT AZURE
• T-SYSTEMS*
• CLOUDEO*
• CREODIAS*
• DESCARTES LABS
• EARTH-I
• EURODATACUBE*
• GOOGLE EARTH ENGINE
• NORTH.IO*
• OPEN DATA CUBE
• OPENEO*
• PLANET EXPLORER
• SENTINEL-HUB*
(SINERGISE)
• UP42*
• AFRY POYRY*
• AIRBUS*
• AVINEON*
• BEIJING DIGSUR SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY CO.
• DETEKTIA*
• E-GEOS*
• GAF*
• GEOFEM*
• MAXAR
• PLANETEK*
• SATSENSE*
• SPOTLITE*
• SNC-LAVALIN
• TRE ALTAMIRA*
• 1SPATIAL*
• ACCUWEATHER
• AFRY POYRY*
• ATKINSRÉALIS
• ZERO GRAVITY*
• CAR OWNERS
• COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
DRIVERS
• ENFORCERS
• FLEET OPERATORS
• FERROVIAL
• INSURANCE COMPANIES
• MEMBER STATES
• PRODUCERS OF
INFOTAINMENT SYSTEMS
• ROAD NETWORK
OPERATORS
• ALOS-2 (JAXA)
• COPERNICUS SENTINELS*
• COSMO-SKYMED (ASI)*
• RADARSAT (CSA)
• RELEVANT IN-SITU
NETWORKS
• OTHER RELEVANT
EUROPEAN NATIONAL
MISSIONS
• FEDERATED
INFRASTRUCTURE
(E.G. GAIA-X)*
• SENTINEL COLLABORATIVE
GROUND SEGMENT*
• COPERNICUS
ATMOSPHERE
MONITORING SERVICE
(CAMS)*
• COPERNICUS LAND
MONITORING SERVICE
(CLMS)*
• WEKEO*
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in EO downstream activities. Please note that enterprises listed in the data providers step of the value chain often
provide platforms as a service. For the sake of simplicity the data providers are not repeated in other stages of the value chain in which they are active.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 13 for a comprehensive description of the EO value chain and how to interpret them at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the company, though the actual area of activity might be wider.
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
EARTH
OBSERVATION
ROAD AND AUTOMOTIVE169EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
In-vehicle systems, insurance telematics and emergency assistance pushed
GNSS growth
Following an overall stable phase in the first half of the 2010’s, caused by the maturity of different
applications and the decline of PNDs, the market entered a period of sustained growth, driven by the
uptake of in-vehicle systems (IVS), insurance telematics and emergency assistance.
The growth of IVS has first compensated the decline of PNDs and then boosted GNSS market
uptake, as automakers converged towards a trend of considering GNSS capabilities on a serial basis
essential for embedding various services and applications, through the centralisation of the positioning
function in the built-positioning engine of the vehicle. Shipments of IVS grew from 22 million in 2012 to
almost 60 million in 2022.
Insurance telematics has also been growing steadily over recent years. The period of the COVID-19
pandemic has seen a shift on the side of insurers from the usual underwriting models to pay-as-you-
drive and pay-how-you-drive models. Moreover, while Europe and North America historically represent
established markets, Asia-Pacific is driving further growth thanks to increased demand in India, China
and Japan.
Finally, the surge of emergency assistance, driven by regulation in Europe and supported by voluntary
schemes worldwide, has led the market for the application to surge from 1.8 to 17 million units per year.
OEMs progress on automated driving
The advent of automation is gradually materialising, thanks to the progress of vehicle technology (including
positioning and navigation), standards, the development of legislation (mandates for ADAS in the European
legislations that include intelligent speed assistance) and the deployment of the necessary infrastructure (connectivity,
correction services, road network).
Several OEMs already launched vehicles with L2+ advanced driver assistance capabilities and many more are
expected to in the short term. L2+ systems let drivers to take their hands off the wheel for periods defined by local laws
– often for several seconds.
Mercedes-Benz became the first OEM with L3 cars to receive approval by the German transport authority to legally
drive on Germany’s national roads as well as in one US state. BMW announced in 2023 that it will bring its L3 self-
driving system into one of their models in the spring of 2024 and Stellantis is set to start rolling out Level 3 automated
driving by 2024. It is expected that other OEMs such as Ford, Hyundai-Kia, GM, and Honda, will follow suit in the
coming years – deployment schemes are shaping, with the 2025 timeframe expected to be an inflection point for L3
deployment in a variety of production models.
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Units (millions)
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
Personal Navigation Devices (PND) In-Vehicle Systems (IVS)
Road User Charging (RUC) Insurance telematics
Emergency assistance Road Asset Management
Bike sharing Connected and Automated Driving (CAD)
Public Transport - buses Smart tachograph
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
© iStock
170ROAD AND AUTOMOTIVE
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
Growing automotive market, automation and smart mobility will boost
GNSS sales
The future outlook of GNSS shipments in Road is positive and will be driven both by the growth of
automotive sales and by the increasing uptake of applications.
The automotive market is expected to enjoy a long-term growth trend thanks to a number of factors,
including the increasing demand for personal and commercial vehicles worldwide (in particular in Asia-
Pacific), the increasing maturity of the new paradigms of electrification and automation, as well as the
higher awareness among consumers of safety and environmental aspects.
As well as driving the automotive market, these factors will expand the market of GNSS applications. The
increasing demand for vehicles will drive the further growth of IVS, which will soon become a common
feature of new vehicles, to support all the positioning-based services and features offered by OEMs.
The rise of automation, coupled with the evolution of legislation and standards, will create a market
for CAD, which will allow cars and their passengers to benefit from autonomous driving features (SAE
level 4 and 5), while increased awareness of safety aspects will boost the demand for services such as
emergency assistance, which will reach almost 30 million units per annum by 2033.
Finally, the increased sensitivity of consumers to environmental issues will further support the rise of
mobility business models based on the service (e.g. MaaS) and sharing dimensions (e.g. car and bike
sharing). These, in turn, will drive the need of asset management solutions by mobility providers and
transport operators, with the application increasing to almost 15 million shipments in 2033, more than
double the number of sales in 2023.
Progress in standards at European and ISO level paves the way to the uptake
of space-enabled solutions
A range of different standardisation initiatives is contributing to the
introduction of space-enabled technologies in road. As a selected
example, ISO 26262 covers functional safety for autonomous vehicles,
including a risk classification scheme (ASIL) to be complied by all
components, including GNSS. At European level, the CEN CENELEC
series of standards EN16803 addresses the use of GNSS technology
for road Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS). Part 1 of the series defined
the metrics for performance measurement, while part 2 and 3 started
addressing the performance of the positioning terminals. Beyond this,
additional efforts are taking place: the work on part 4 of EN16803
will complete the series by defining the procedures for the design and
validation of test scenarios for performance measurement.
At international level, within ISO/TC20/SC14, a dedicated WG (WG8
- Downstream space services and space-based applications) was
established to cover downstream standards. The scope of activities
includes PNT/GNSS and Earth Observation, including in the automotive
domain.
ITS Directive revision approved in October 2023 set to pave the way
for Galileo and Copernicus in ITS
The ITS Directive (2010/40/EU) represents a “toolbox directive” to harmonise and accelerate
the adoption of ITS (Intelligent Transport Systems) in the EU. The revision of the ITS Directive,
adopted in October 2023, aims to expand the initial scope to cover new challenges, and further
promote the adoption of ITS services. The revision also proposes to ensure the compatibility
of ITS services relying on timing and positioning with Galileo navigation services (OS, OSNMA
and HAS) and EGNOS, and to ensure that, where appropriate, ITS services relying on EO use
Copernicus data, information and services. Accordingly, the revised directive will support the
adoption of European GNSS and Copernicus in ITS and the related benefits for ITS users.
The CCAM Partnership: defining connected, cooperative and automated
mobility of tomorrow
Formalised in 2021 and co-funded by the EU, the CCAM Partnership aligns all stakeholders’
R&I efforts to accelerate the implementation of innovative CCAM technologies and services in
Europe, including space-based ones. It aims to design a mobility system that is user-centric and
inclusive, to enhance road safety, to minimise congestion, and to reduce environmental impact
by fostering collaborative research, conducting testing and initiating demonstration projects on a
European scale. The strategic research innovation agenda (SRIA) set by the partnership for the
2021-2027 period can be accessed here.
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Smart tachograph Bike sharing
Personal Navigation Devices (PND) Road User Charging (RUC)
Public Transport - buses Insurance telematics
In-Vehicle Systems (IVS) Emergency assistance
Road Asset Management Connected and Automated Driving (CAD)
Map software updates Smartphone navigation apps*
*: Pay-to-download, In-app-purchases and ad revenue from navigation apps
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (millions)
Shipments of GNSSdevices by application
Personal Navigation Devices (PND) In-Vehicle Systems (IVS)
Road User Charging (RUC) Insurance telematics
Emergency assistance
Smart tachograph
Connected and Automated Driving (CAD)
Road Asset Management
Bike sharing
Public Transport - buses
2 2033
a
a + Caribbean
a
a + Caribbean
2033
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
© iStock
ROAD AND AUTOMOTIVE171EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
EUROPEAN SYSTEMS AND PROJECTS
HAS and OSNMA support more safe and secure road transport
Galileo HAS
The Galileo High Accuracy Service (HAS) has received
significant attention from the automotive industry, which
sees the potential from positioning performances down to
a decimetre level.
Industry players are already working on the implementation
of HAS for non-safety critical use cases such as lane
manual navigation, as well as V2X functionalities, requiring
accurate positioning.
HAS could also be used to support the positioning
automated driving functions, as long as the positioning
solution leveraged by the vehicle also includes the
necessary integrity.
Galileo Emergency Warning Satellite Service
Galileo’s Emergency Warning Satellite Service (EWSS) is designed to globally broadcast emergency warnings linked to natural or
man-made disasters to smartphones, depending on the area in which the user is located. It has the major advantage of remaining
operational when all terrestrial communication networks are down. EWSS is expected to be operational (initial services) in 2025
upcoming years.
Recently, the Traveller Information Services Association (TISA) has progressed on the development of the TPEG protocol family,
covering the broadcast of traffic and transport information to end users. The TPEG2 Emergency Alerts and Warnings (EAW)
technology now supports the distribution of official Emergency Alerts and Warnings as issued by public authorities and/or authorised
agencies, without language barriers. In the future, it could represent a relevant dissemination protocol for Galileo EWSS.
Galileo Open Service and OSNMA
The Galileo Open Service is widely adopted in road and
automotive. In addition to improving accuracy, Galileo offers, in a
multi-constellation environment, better performance in operational
scenarios such as urban canyons.
The Open Service Navigation Message Authentication (OSNMA)
provides receivers with the assurance that the received Galileo
navigation message is coming from the system itself and has not
been modified.
For road applications, OSNMA can bring benefits mainly in liability
or safety critical applications that need authentication of GNSS data,
such as road user charging, smart tachograph, insurance telematics,
asset management and connected and automated driving.
ACCURATE project
The ACCURATE project had the objective of developing a high-precision positioning automotive system for enabling the
development and deployment of complex automated driving functions. In the framework of the Accurate project, a EGNSS-based
precise positioning OBU (On Board Unit) has been developed. The system relies on an advanced GNSS-based positioning unit for
absolute positioning, enhanced with sensor fusion. The ACCURATE solution was successfully demonstrated in Prague in October
2022, in the presence of the Czech transport minister.
Additionally, ACCURATE focused on the processes required for EGNSS validation and certification, serving as a guideline for higher
levels of automated driving.
Through this project, the partners addressed market needs, gaining invaluable insights to inform their strategic directions.
The outcomes of the project, elevated the Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of the products of the partners, marking a pivotal
milestone in their development. A further direct outcome was a noticeable increase in the visibility of the project partners within the
market, together with an improved positioning in terms of addressing industry demands.
More information available at: https://www.accurate-obu.eu/about/Terminology used on this page is explained in Annex 2 for both GNSS and EO performance parameters.
ESRIUM project – Safe and efficient roads
ESRIUM is an international project fostering safer and
more efficient road maps to achieve a smarter, safer and
greener transport system. The key innovation covered in the
project was an EGNSS-based digital map of road surface
damage and road wear, containing unique information for
road operators to enhance road maintenance planning and to
provide route recommendations to automated vehicles.
The project, which has demonstrated the use of OSNMA,
forseees that the ESRIUM solution captures the status of the
road surface through sensors and EGNSS-based localisation
devices. This information is then
sent to the platform operator,
which integrates it into a digital map
and generates safety warnings.
Based on these safety warnings,
road operators can communicate
with CAD drivers and truck fleet
operators to avoid safety risks and
improve the use of the road network.
© iStock
Higher
Accuracy
Greater
Availability
More Robust
Positioning
Authentication
Open service
features
High accuracy
service
Multi-
frequency
GalileoGalileo
172ROAD AND AUTOMOTIVE
REFERENCE CHARTS
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
Revenue from GNSS device sales and services by region Revenue from GNSS device sales and services by application
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
0
1
2
3
4
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Smart tachograph Bike sharing
Personal Navigation Devices (PND) Road User Charging (RUC)
Public Transport - buses Insurance telematics
In-Vehicle Systems (IVS) Emergency assistance
Road Asset Management Connected and Automated Driving (CAD)
Map software updates Smartphone navigation apps*
*: Pay-to-download, In-app-purchases and ad revenue from navigation apps
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (millions)
Installed base of GNSSdevices by application
Personal Navigation Devices (PND) In-Vehicle Systems (IVS)
Road User Charging (RUC) Insurance telematics
Emergency assistance
Smart tachograph
Connected and Automated Driving (CAD)
Road Asset Management
Bike sharing
Public Transport - buses
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (millions)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (billions)
Revenue of GNSSdevice sales and services by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
40
60
80
100
120
140
€ (billions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by application
0
1
2
3
4
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Smart tachograph Bike sharing
Personal Navigation Devices (PND) Road User Charging (RUC)
Public Transport - buses Insurance telematics
In-Vehicle Systems (IVS) Emergency assistance
Road Asset Management Connected and Automated Driving (CAD)
Map software updates Smartphone navigation apps*
*: Pay-to-download, In-app-purchases and ad revenue from navigation apps
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (millions)
Installed base of GNSSdevices by application
Personal Navigation Devices (PND) In-Vehicle Systems (IVS)
Road User Charging (RUC) Insurance telematics
Emergency assistance
Smart tachograph
Connected and Automated Driving (CAD)
Road Asset Management
Bike sharing
Public Transport - buses
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (millions)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (billions)
Revenue of GNSSdevice sales and services by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
40
60
80
100
120
140
€ (billions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by application
0
1
2
3
4
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Smart tachograph Bike sharing
Personal Navigation Devices (PND) Road User Charging (RUC)
Public Transport - buses Insurance telematics
In-Vehicle Systems (IVS) Emergency assistance
Road Asset Management Connected and Automated Driving (CAD)
Map software updates Smartphone navigation apps*
*: Pay-to-download, In-app-purchases and ad revenue from navigation apps
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (millions)
Installed base of GNSSdevices by application
Personal Navigation Devices (PND) In-Vehicle Systems (IVS)
Road User Charging (RUC) Insurance telematics
Emergency assistance
Smart tachograph
Connected and Automated Driving (CAD)
Road Asset Management
Bike sharing
Public Transport - buses
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (millions)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (billions)
Revenue of GNSSdevice sales and services by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
40
60
80
100
120
140
€ (billions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by application
0
1
2
3
4
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Smart tachograph Bike sharing
Personal Navigation Devices (PND) Road User Charging (RUC)
Public Transport - buses Insurance telematics
In-Vehicle Systems (IVS) Emergency assistance
Road Asset Management Connected and Automated Driving (CAD)
Map software updates Smartphone navigation apps*
*: Pay-to-download, In-app-purchases and ad revenue from navigation apps
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (millions)
Installed base of GNSSdevices by application
Personal Navigation Devices (PND) In-Vehicle Systems (IVS)
Road User Charging (RUC) Insurance telematics
Emergency assistance
Smart tachograph
Connected and Automated Driving (CAD)
Road Asset Management
Bike sharing
Public Transport - buses
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (millions)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (billions)
Revenue of GNSSdevice sales and services by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
40
60
80
100
120
140
€ (billions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by application
ROAD AND AUTOMOTIVE173EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
REFERENCE CHARTS
Revenue from EO data sales by application
Revenue from EO services sales by application
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
€ (millions)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
Congestion control Infotainment services
Congestion control Infotainment services
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
€ (millions)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
€ (millions)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
Congestion control Infotainment services
Congestion control Infotainment services
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
Revenue from EO data sales by region
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
Guidance, Navigation and Control
(GNC) Subsystem
• Attitude Determination (AD)
• Precise Orbit Determination (POD)
• Real-Time Navigation (RTN)
• Space Timing & Synchronisation (S-T&S)SPACE
174
SPACE
Although GNSS was originally designed to serve terrestrial users, it has also proven to
be a valuable tool in space. Within the last decade the space industry has experienced
a profound transformation. Driven by technological advancements and a new
entrepreneurial spirit, the space environment is hosting an increasing number of platforms
and has become a new playground for GNSS technologies. The vast majority of all the
satellites in Low Earth Orbit (LEO) today carry GNSS receivers to calculate their position.
Above LEO, the characterisation of the interoperable Multi-GNSS Space Service Volume
(SSV) has allowed GNSS PNT applications to be extended to the Moon, contributing to
the so-called cislunar economy, with dozens of very different commercial and institutional
missions planned for the coming decades.
Therefore, providing reliable real-time GNSS data to telecommunications, Earth
Observation, scientific development and any type of spacecraft can produce many
financial, technical and societal benefits, such as reduced mission costs, improved
navigation performances and the production of trustworthy mission data.
What you can read in this chapter
• Key trends: New Space initiatives calling for better space-based services.
• User Perspective: Spaceborne GNSS receivers are benefitting from new services.
• Industry: Space GNSS value chain.
• Recent Developments: Mega-constellations and new associated business models are
driving the coming decade of shipments.
• Future Market Evolution: Calling for an international standardisation of technical
means and regulations.
• European Systems and Projects: First examples of Galileo solutions adopted by the
space users.
• Reference Charts: Yearly evolution of installed base of GNSS devices and revenues by
application and region.
© unsplash.comLunar Applications
• Lunar Orbit (LO)
• Moon Surface positioning (MS)
• Translunar Orbit (TLO)Supporting or Acting as Mission
Payloads
• Scientific & Operational Missions (SOM)
• Technology Demonstration (TechD)Legend
EO application
GNSS application
Synergetic application
(combined use of EO and GNSS)
Application descriptions can be found in Annex 3.
SPACE175EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
KEY TRENDS
Low-Earth Orbit Mega-constellations
The launch of Low Earth Orbits (LEO) mega-constellation projects has become a symbol of this new era,
with new projects continuously arising to provide many types of space-based services.
In satellite communications and broadband applications, and driven by the needs of global coverage and low
latency, hundreds or even thousands of satellites are being launched to compete with large GEO satellites.
Pico-satellite (<1kg) constellations have already conducted In-Orbit Validation (IoV) for Internet of Things
(IoT) applications, with use cases such as providing connectivity to monitoring sensor stations located in
remote areas. Indeed, small satellites accounted for about 95% of spacecraft launched in 2022.
GNSS has a major role to play in this evolution, thanks to the financial and technical benefits it brings,
including a reduction in the number of instruments, a reduced dependence on ground-based stations and
improved navigation performances, as well as its applicability to both historical and emerging stakeholders.
New business models based on a rapid prototyping, production and deployment of small satellites are
today driving down the costs-to-orbit, particularly on LEO. In fact, LEO-PNT initiatives are also benefiting
from the more agile New Space approach. There are several projects to set-up these constellations of
smaller satellites, which will supplement GNSS ones and will bring new services and better resilience.
Coupled with a permanent quest for smaller, lighter and lower-cost solutions, this brings new challenges
to the space sector and unprecedented opportunities for the spaceborne GNSS industry.
Space-based European critical infrastructures
In 2022, EU identified space as a strategic domain in the Strategic Compass and called for an EU Space
Strategy for Security and Defence, where EU is taking action to protect its space assets. The EU's
new strategy marks a paradigm shift, aimed at bolstering EU resilience in and from space. The strategy
proposes actions to strengthen the resilience and protection of space systems and services in the EU.
The communication satellites such as those to be deployed as part of IRIS², the navigation satellites from
Galileo and the Earth Observation Copernicus satellites are a core part of this context.
The Strategy proposes the launch of two pilots: one for the delivery of initial Space Domain Awareness
(SDA) services building upon the capacities of Member States, and another for a new Earth Observation
governmental service as part of the evolution of Copernicus, complementing existing assets.
The strategy also commits to better connect space, defence and security at EU level and ensure synergies
and cross-fertilisation, notably in terms of research and development.
In this context, the EU SST Collision Avoidance service is already safeguarding Galileo’s satellites and
its services, while the Union Secure Connectivity Programme IRIS2 should satisfy space sustainability
criteria and be an example of good practice in Space Traffic Management (STM) and in SST, contributing
to the reduction of the amount of space debris produced, and the prevention of on-orbit break-ups and
on-orbit collisions.
To the Moon and beyond
The space economy has traditionally existed up to the geostationary (GEO) belt, comprising around 560
satellites currently operating. Below this belt, the GNSS constellations can be found in Medium Earth
Orbit (MEO) and in Low Earth Orbit (LEO), where most of the Earth observation satellites operate, as
well as a growing swarm of Cubesats, telecom constellations and the International Space Station.
However, interest in another segment of the space economy has grown significantly in recent years: the
cislunar economy that is built up between the Earth and the Moon space. A key factor for this has been
the demonstrated presence of iced water on the lunar south pole.
The international space community, led by UNOOSA, has already characterised the Multi-GNSS Space
Service Volume (SSV), but more efforts are being dedicated to extend GNSS PNT applications to
the Moon. Starting with the use of the already existing Earth-GNSS constellations via high-sensitivity
space receivers, leveraging the use of GNSS signal side lobes, a new communications and navigation
infrastructure is planned to be settled via ESA’s Moonlight initiative, with dedicated lunar orbiting
satellites and lunar beacon ranging sources for the benefit of lunar missions.
On the spacecraft side, the US launched the most powerful to date space vehicle in December 2022,
the Space Launch System. Adopting this system, the Artemis Missions will establish a long-term
presence on the Moon. The experience gained will be used to send the first crewed missions to Mars.
GNSS in support of space-based EO services
Precise Orbit Determination (POD) consists of the estimation of the position and velocity vectors of an
orbiting spacecraft with the highest possible accuracy. POD has typically been performed on the ground,
in post-processing, making use of the best available auxiliary data. Indeed, the evolution of POD to
achieve the best results in terms of orbital accuracy has mostly been driven by EO mission requirements
in LEO such as SAR, Altimetry, Radio Occultation and others.
More recently, the use of GNSS to determine POD has grown in importance and established itself as one
of the common techniques to determine the trajectories of satellites in LEO.
The broadcast of high-quality ephemeris by Galileo is expected
to permit real-time POD with accuracies (3D RMS) below 15cm
in LEO. Beyond that, the more recent declaration of the Galileo
High Accuracy Service (HAS) in January 2023, as the first global
in-orbit source of precise positioning data, will help achieve
greater accuracy.
This free-of-charge capability fits well with the needs of the New
Space community, as suggested by the typology of spaceborne
GNSS HAS-capable receivers already on the market or under
development.
New Space initiatives calling for better space-based services
Key market trends
• Mega-constellations in the Low Earth Orbit are already providing satellite-based and space data services, driven by New Space and the continuously increasing investment of the private sector
• Following the discovery back in 2018 of water ice in the polar regions of the Moon, over the coming years a growing roadmap of missions are planned to the Moon and beyond
• As space has become a critical domain for national security, governments are investing in increasing resilience and autonomy, particularly through Space Situational Awareness and secured communications
• Precise Orbit Determination of satellites is increasingly dependent on the use of GNSS, with Galileo being a major contributor thanks to the unrivalled quality of its services
Space GNSS HAS-enabled receiver
© Deimos
176SPACE
USER PERSPECTIVE
Spaceborne GNSS receivers are benefitting from new services
Key GNSS user requirements
The key GNSS user requirements for the different application
groups within the space segment are collected using a harmonised
procedure at EU level.
Information is collected through extensive interactions with user
groups, providers and experts in a continuous process culminating
at the User Consultation Platforms (UCP).
All relevant requirements are documented in detail and updated
regularly within the Report on space user needs and requirements
which will be issued in 2024.
Galileo’s High Accuracy Service: adding value for space users
Galileo’s High Accuracy Service (HAS) was declared operational in January 2023. It is a global,
free-of-charge and standalone service that is operational 24/7. Its precise satellite orbit, clock
and signal biases corrections are provided via the Galileo satellites E6-B signal and via the
Internet Data Distribution. It thus provides users with decimetre level positioning accuracy
when using a PPP processing algorithm.
The first results of Precise Orbit Determination (POD) showed that the accuracies obtained
with HAS were marginally worse than those achieved with third-party hourly ultra-rapid
GNSS orbit and clock products, although reduced latency and greater independence of the
ground segment were observed1, with associated economic savings
in some cases.
As such, HAS is already being adopted by space receiver
manufacturers, obviously based on the use of the E6-B signal
channel, to provide satellite operators with autonomous and highly
accurate real-time navigation products. The availability of accurate
orbit information will support advanced mission concepts and
EO missions with onboard and near real-time data processing
requirements.
Additional details about HAS description, interface channels,
characteristics and Minimum Performance Levels (MPLs) can be
found on the European GNSS Service Centre website.
1 Hauschild, A., Montenbruck, O., Steigenberger, P. et al. Orbit determination of Sentinel-6A
using the Galileo high accuracy service test signal. GPS Solut 26, 120 (2022). https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10291-022-01312-5
Operational drivers for the use of GNSS receivers onboard
spacecraft
Although all space users operate in a similar environment – i.e. outer space – many
variables come into play when identifying case-to-case GNSS requirements.
Depending on their mass, designed lifespan or mission type and costs
characteristics, for example, and the orbit they are targeting, with variable
geometrical constraints and GNSS signal availability, spacecraft are indeed not
expected to be equipped with the same kind of spaceborne GNSS receivers.
At relatively low altitudes, between 3 000 and 8 000 km, GNSS receivers
generally benefit from a good signal-in-space availability. By contrast, high-
altitude orbits at 36 000 km and above are much more challenging as the
receiver must cope with a significantly reduced GNSS signal availability and
therefore needs to be ultrasensitive and able to exploit GNSS signals’ side lobes.
Also, large satellites can install relatively heavy receivers, up to a few kilos, while
SmallSats must avoid this extra mass.
Similarly, most CubeSat missions cannot afford expensive pieces of equipment
while long-term missions are ready to do so to guarantee the system’s
robustness.
Lastly, when considering the smaller satellite groups, such as the picosatellites,
power constraints will impact not only the choice of the receiver, but also the
percentage of time the receiver will be ‘on’ and providing PVT information to
the mission.
Receivers to navigate ‘above’ GNSS satellites
Most GNSS space users have been located at low altitudes (i.e. LEO orbits), where GNSS signal
reception is similar to that on the ground.
However, over the past few years GNSS has become a common solution for GEO satellites,
which are making increased use of low-thrust electric propulsion; the use of this technology
during geostationary transfer orbits and circularisation manoeuvres can lower the necessary
propellant mass and reduce the launch cost. The drawback is the obligation to extend this phase
of the mission by several months. During such a long period, GNSS-based, free-of-charge, real-
time navigation allows mission costs associated with ground
tracking and positioning services to be avoided.
Launched in September 2022, EUTELSAT Konnect VHTS is
an example of a telecommunications, all-electric GEO satellite
equipped with GNSS, which also uses this kind of propulsion to
maintain its position after entering mission orbit.
When looking beyond GEO, GNSS is also envisaged as at least
a transitory navigation means for certain space missions to
reach the Moon.
Operational
Orbit
Spacecraft
Characteristics
Mission
Costs
© iStock
SPACE177EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
INDUSTRY
Space-borne GNSS Value Chain 1
FINAL USER
COMMUNITIES
PROVIDERS
OF SERVICES
GENERATED
IN SPACE
SPACECRAFT
OPERATORS
SPACECRAFT
MANUFACTURERS &
DEVELOPERS
COMPONENTS AND
RECEIVER MANUFACTURERS
• AIRBUS*
• ANALOG DEVICES
• BEYOND-GRAVITY*
• BLILEY TECHNOLOGIES
• CAES
• CHINA GREAT WALL
INDUSTRY*
• COBHAM*
• DEIMOS SPACE*
• DLR*
• GENERAL DYNAMICS
• HEXAGON*
• HONEYWELL
• NEC
• NEWSPACE SYSTEMS*
• OHB*
• RAKON
• MOOG
• QASCOM*
• SAFRAN*
• SKYFOXLABS*
• SPACEMANIC*
• SPACE PNT*
• SPACEX
• SYNTONY GNSS*
• SYRLINKS*
• THALES*
• U-BLOX*
• AIRBUS*
• BOEING
• CHINA GREAT WALL
INDUSTRY
• HEXAGON*
• ICEYE*
• LOCKHEED MARTIN
• MAXAR TECHNOLOGIES
• NORTHROP GRUMMAN
• SPACEX
• SPIRE GLOBAL
• THALES*
• SMALL SATELLITES
DEVELOPERS
(E.G. AAC CLYDE SPACE*,
REDWIRE, DEIMOS SPACE*,
GOMSPACE*, SATREV*,
ISISPACE*)
• UNIVERSITIES
• ARMED FORCES
• ESA (ESOC)*
• EU*
• NASA
• NATIONAL SPACE
AGENCIES
• NON-PROFIT
ORGANISATIONS
(E.G. AMSAT)
• RESEARCH CENTRES
• UNIVERSITIES
• ARIANEGROUP*
• EUTELSAT*
• HISDESAT*
• HISPASAT*
• ICEYE*
• INMARSAT
• INTELSAT*
• ONEWEB
• SES*
• SPACEX
• STARLINK
• VIASAT
• EU (E.G. COPERNICUS)*
• GOVERNMENTAL
INSTITUTIONS
• RESEARCH CENTERS
• UNIVERSITIES
• PROVIDERS OF EO
SERVICES
• PROVIDERS OF TELECOM
SERVICES
• EARTH SCIENCES
RESEARCHERS
• EMERGENCY SERVICES
• ENVIRONMENTAL
MONITORING AGENCIES
• GEOSPATIAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCIES
• INFRASTRUCTURE
OPERATORS
• LAW ENFORCEMENT
BODIES
• PUBLIC SAFETY
INSTITUTIONS
• TERRITORY PLANNERS
European2 industry in the global arena
In 2021, Europe significantly contributed to the market for GNSS
components and receivers, together with North America, Russia and
China. Europe’s positioning benefits from a combination of both historical
stakeholders and new actors answering New Space needs. Airbus, Safran,
Thales, Hexagon, U-Blox and Beyond Gravity are the largest European
manufacturers in the market segment.
GNSS
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in GNSS downstream activities.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 23 for a comprehensive description of the GNSS value chain and how to interpret it at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the company, though the actual area of activity might be wider.
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
178SPACE
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Mega-constellations and new business models are driving the coming
decade of shipments
Whether it is for real-time on-board autonomous navigation, supporting specific scientific or operational
satellite missions, or enabling deep-space activities such as a translunar orbits, user needs and
associated priorities vary. Three categories of receivers are defined.
While ‘Low-End’ receivers encompass Commercial-Off-The-Shelf (COTS) New Space technologies
and low-cost products offering appreciable trade-offs between performances and affordability, ‘High-
End’ receivers correspond to much more robust – and expensive – hardware systems expected to run
safely for at least a decade in outer space. Eventually, ‘Payload/Scientific’ receivers, used as part of the
payload instrumentation, must respond to specific needs, not necessarily navigation-related.
The availability and use of more GNSS satellites and of dual-frequency receivers (even triple in certain
cases) and of advanced navigation algorithms provides superior positioning accuracy. The increase
in accuracy has, indeed, been supported by the quality of the ephemerides provided by Galileo
constellation, which show smaller orbit and clock offset errors.
Shipments of GNSS devices by receiver category
Mega-constellations boost the number of GNSS devices in outer space
In 2000, around 800 satellites were orbiting the Earth. That number has increased to around 7 000,
with 2 500 new satellites estimated to be launched each year over the next decade.
The number of mega-constellation projects is increasing and the plans for launches of LEO as well
as MEO satellites are in the tens of thousands. This is shown by the chart on the left, as well as the
charts on page 181.
The chart presents EUSPA’s estimation on the number and types of space GNSS receivers to be
shipped over the next decade. Having validated key assumptions with industry, such as the number of
GNSS devices per different type of satellite, projections show that the demand for components and
hence for space GNSS receivers is already a fact, and that such growth will continue over the next
few years, even if with a slightly reduced trend from 2028.
Revenues from GNSS device sales are forecast to peak around 2027 and slightly decrease after
this point, with the predicted increase in the installed base of GNSS devices expected to no longer
compensate for the decrease of unit prices expected in space GNSS receivers.
It should be noted that source data for satellite launches were compiled from existing databases
and press releases of all the major space players. Data were only used when launch dates were also
available.
Unique features developed for New Space users
The New Space opens the space sector to an economic model in which satellites are manufactured in
batch, launches occur every month, parts and units are mass-produced and processes are industrialised.
Projects are launched rapidly, adopting a more trust-based and risk-tolerant approach.
A major trend conceived under the New Space industry era is the change from large and expensive
satellites to constellations of smaller, cost-optimised satellites.
The reduction of mission costs is being achieved, on the one hand, thanks to economies of scale,
where unitary production costs are optimised by increasing production. On the other hand, product
development and design requirements, applicable as well to the GNSS receivers, include features not
yet developed by this industry. These could be:
• The use of Commercial-Off-The-Shelf (COTS), non-space qualified, components utilised to manufacture
the spacecraft. Under this mass-production model, satellites are designed with a lifespan of less than
five years. This allows the use of components with lower requirements to resist the effects of space
radiation.
• The use of software-defined receivers (SDR), offering features such as re-programmability (i.e.
upgradeability) in the form of over-the-air (OTA) software updates, a feature quite unique from the
mobile devices industry until very recently.
These and other ground-breaking innovations have made it possible to reduce prices of space GNSS
receivers by an order of magnitude, in line with the overall New Space philosophy.
0
200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Low-end receivers High-end receivers Scientific/Commercial Missions Payloads
0
200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
9 000
10 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units
Shipments of GNSS devices by receiver category
Low-end receivers High-end receivers Scientific/Commercial Missions Payloads
Attitude
Determination
(AD
Precise Orbit
Determination
(POD)
Real Time
Navigation
(RTN)
Space Timing &
Synchronisation
(S-T&S)
Lunar Orbit
(LL)
Moon Surface
positioning
(MS)
Translunar
Orbit (TLO)
Scientific &
Operational
Missions
(SOM)
Technology
Demonstration
(TechD)
Low-End Early
Stage
Early
Stage Used Used - - - Used -
High-End Used Used Used Used Early
Stage
Early
Stage Used Used Used
Payload/
Scientific - - - - - Early
Stage - Used -
Applications
Receiver
category
SPACE179EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
Aviation and Space getting closer: High-Altitude Operations (HAOs) and Space Traffic Management (STM)
The dynamic, integrated management of air traffic through the provision of facilities and seamless
services is known as Air Traffic Management (ATM) and is a pillar of aviation since decades. Recently,
the creation and definition of the Unmanned Traffic Management (UTM) is addressing the challenges
posed by the rising number of drones operating below typical manned aviation altitudes.
In addition, higher airspace or the area near or above FL 600/FL660 is becoming a new frontier for
flight. Although there is not yet any predominant user type and the numbers are rather low compared
to orbiting altitudes, there are many initiatives ongoing worldwide such as suborbital flights and High-
Altitude Operations (HAOs). This evolving environment narrows the frontiers between the aerial and
orbiting worlds with new airspace management challenges to be addressed.
In this context, ECHO and ECHO 2 (European Concept for Higher Altitude Operations) are two
consecutive research projects led by Eurocontrol aimed, firstly, at developing a Concept of Operations
(CONOPS) for European Higher Airspace operations, and secondly, at introducing a module on space
launch real-time monitoring and packages covering ground and air-ground operational integration
procedures. EASA has in parallel published a Proposal for a Roadmap on Higher Space Operations (HAO).
Above HAO altitudes, the expansion of space users and NewSpace activities can overwhelm current
space flight safety processes, putting at risk space infrastructure and human spaceflight. Today, space
traffic is mainly addressed by the Outer Space Treaty, which establishes that no nation may claim
sovereignty over outer space (article II), and the IADC space debris guidelines, which aim to limit the
generation of space debris. No ‘highway code’ has been established in outer space by the international
community so far, and business-as-usual will cease to be valid at some point.
As a consequence, and with the launch into orbit of new LEO satellites, the enforcement of Space Traffic
Management (STM) policies is needed. In that respect, the European Commission issued in February
2022 a Joint Communication to the European Parliament and the Council titled “An EU Approach for
Space Traffic Management”, supported by the space regulation of year 2021, aimed at paving the
way towards an international approach to STM. STM “encompasses the means and the rules to access,
conduct activities in, and return from outer space safely, sustainably and securely” and is dependent
upon a foundation of continuous Space Situational Awareness (SSA), of which Space Surveillance
and Tracking (SST) is a component. In the Joint Communication, EU SST is considered the operational
pillar of STM and therefore must be reinforced with new services, such as space debris mitigation and
remediation, and technologies. The EUSPA has been responsible for operating the EU SST front desk
since 1 July 2023.
The question of the role GNSS solutions could play in this long-lasting process is legitimate. But Galileo
should allow, from the navigation infrastructure perspective, a seamless transition between the ATM
and STM context.
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
Calling for an international standardisation of technical means and regulations
Address the need for global collaboration in defining the Multi-GNSS SSV
The United Nations International Committee on GNSS (UN ICG) was established in 2005 as a
cooperative framework upon which current and future international providers of GNSS could work
together to ensure greater compatibility, interoperability and transparency of their systems.
Published in September 2021 and collecting the outcomes of its Working Group B, the most notable
accomplishment of ICG in recent years has been the release of the second version of the Interoperable
Multi-GNSS Space Service Volume (SVV) booklet.
By characterising the Interoperable Multi-GNSS SSV, space users can assume a scenario where all
navigation constellations operate together; the signal reception is dramatically improved in higher
orbits and hence there is continuous navigation support, thus promoting the development of new
applications and protecting the use of GNSS.
The development of spaceborne receivers is expected to further leverage, at its own pace, the multi-
constellation and multi-frequency developments achieved in terrestrial ones, driven by the evolution
and adaptation of these devices to the needs of New Space entrants.
Ultimately, several ongoing public and private initiatives around the concept of LEO-PNT are increasingly
the focus of the committee.
The GNSS space service volume and its regions
GEO altitude
(36 000 km)
GNSS MEO altitude
(19 130 – 23 222 km)
Lower space service volume
(3 000 < altitude ≤ 8 000 km)
Upper space service volume
(8 000 < altitude ≤ 36 000 km)
© UNOOSA
180SPACE
EUROPEAN SYSTEMS AND PROJECTS
EU Space Programme services and features for space
applications
The EU Space Programme comprises several flagship components that
work in harmony.
In space applications, Galileo will complement the SSA and secured
satellite connectivity (GOVSATCOM and IRIS 2
) initiatives to open up
more opportunities for synergies.
For example, Galileo PNT will support the evaluation and eventual
performance of Collision Avoidance Manoeuvres (CAMs), providing benefits
to all users of the EU SST. It will also support the future ‘automation’ of CAMs.
On the other hand, the EU secured satellite connectivity initiatives will
find applications in supporting EU space infrastructures or in providing
connectivity to satellites, up to providing intersatellite communication links.
Added value brought by EGNSS
The increase of the overall number of GNSS satellites provides
significant improvements in terms of PNT availability for spacecrafts
orbiting at MEO and beyond.
The superior quality of Galileo orbits and clocks, when compared
to other GNSS constellations, has also brought improved accuracy
for spacecraft orbit determination. Together with dual-frequency
capacities, it guarantees better performances for lower orbits.
Moreover, Galileo HAS goes one step further. With triple-frequency
antennas and receivers to access the E6-B signal, it provides a
source to conduct real-time decimetre-level PPP without the
need to rely on commercial correction services.
Finally, although still in its early stages, the use of Galileo OSNMA is
already being explored as a way of providing more navigation in space.
First examples of Galileo solutions adopted by the Space users
Resilience
Dual and triple
frequency
High accuracy
service Authentication
features
Greater
Availability
Higher
Accuracy
More Robust
Positioning
GalileoGalileo
EGNOS
NewSpace PPP Receiver
Funded as part of the Fundamental Elements scheme, the NewSpace PPP Receiver
(NEWSPAPER) project allowed Beyond Gravity to evolve their Precise Point Positioning (PPP)
software and conceive a GNSS receiver able to revolutionise the concept of Real-Time Precise
Orbit Determination (POD).
Thanks to the adaptations performed in their PPP engine, the EU-made PODRIX spaceborne receiver
is expected to become a game changer: the first space receiver leveraging Galileo’s High Accuracy
Service (HAS) transmitted on the Galileo E6 signal, providing real-time positioning accuracy in the
low decimetre or even centimetre range. The Software Defined Radio (SDR) leveraged from the
previous PODRIX generation has allowed the RF frontend to be returned to support E6 band.
The model has undergone extensive testing on the ground, and one unit is embarked for in-orbit
demonstration on the Copernicus Sentinel-1C, a 2 000 kg polar orbiter situated at an altitude
of 700 km.
The target 3D accuracy to be achieved is of 20 cm.
From a market perspective, the receiver attacks the
Low Earth Orbit satellites and constellations in the
50–500 kg class for space applications.
Beyond Gravity’s next step in this area is to apply
the lessons learnt and the developments of the
NEWSPAPER project into their NavRIX PinPoint, a
HAS-capable GNSS receiver for New Space LEO
applications that makes use of COTS components.
Galileo Cyber Space Receiver
After the successful outcomes achieved in the Enhanced Navigation in Space (ENSPACE) project,
Qascom and its consortium engaged in GalilEo cYber SpacE Receiver (GEYSER).
Launched in 2021 by EUSPA, the project has developed an innovative close-to-market GNSS
space receiver for LEO orbits and Launchers. Indeed, its compactness and low weight (<1 kg)
enables its use in CubeSats and small LEO satellites, such as mega-constellations and LEO-PNT
concepts.
The developed product benefits from various Galileo differentiators and advantages, including
others authentication (OSNMA), robust navigation against interference or dual frequency L1/L5
E1/E5a GPS and Galileo capability, among others.
Through a Dual Frequency Precise Orbit Determination (POD)
plugin, GEYSER aims to offer high accuracy positioning for
satellites, enabling space debris collision avoidance and “station
keeping” as an additional added value.
The product meets the emerging needs of the New Space users,
requiring spaceborne GNSS payloads to provide accurate and
robust navigation and timing: 3D position accuracies below 3 m in
LEO satellites and a timing accuracy below 50 ns are achieved.
A Software Defined Radio approach has been followed, allowing over-the-air firmware updates.
It has also been validated in collaboration with NASA in sounding rockets, CubeSats and aboard
the International Space Station. In this way, the GEYSER project contributes to Qascom’s roadmap
on GNSS space receiver developments, including future missions in lunar scenarios, such as the
Lunar GNSS Receiver Experiment (LuGRE).
Terminology used on this page is explained in Annex 2 for both GNSS and EO performance parameters.
PODRIX receiver and antenna.
© Beyond Gravity
GEYSER prototype
© Qascom
SPACE181EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
REFERENCE CHARTS
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
Revenue from GNSS device sales by region Revenue from GNSS device sales by application
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
0
10 000
20 000
30 000
40 000
50 000
60 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Low-end receivers High-end receivers Scientific/Commercial Missions Payloads
Low-end receivers High-end receivers Scientific/Commercial Missions Payloads
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
0
10 000
20 000
30 000
40 000
50 000
60 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032
Units
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
0
10 000
20 000
30 000
40 000
50 000
60 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Low-end receivers High-end receivers Scientific/Commercial Missions Payloads
Low-end receivers High-end receivers Scientific/Commercial Missions Payloads
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
0
10 000
20 000
30 000
40 000
50 000
60 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032
Units
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
0
10 000
20 000
30 000
40 000
50 000
60 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Low-end receivers High-end receivers Scientific/Commercial Missions Payloads
Low-end receivers High-end receivers Scientific/Commercial Missions Payloads
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
0
10 000
20 000
30 000
40 000
50 000
60 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032
Units
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
Shipments of GNSS devices by receiver category
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by region
0
10 000
20 000
30 000
40 000
50 000
60 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
Low-end receivers High-end receivers Scientific/Commercial Missions Payloads
Low-end receivers High-end receivers Scientific/Commercial Missions Payloads
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1 400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales by application
0
10 000
20 000
30 000
40 000
50 000
60 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032
Units
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
Shipments of GNSS devices by receiver category
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
AND CULTURAL HERITAGE
URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND CULTURAL HERITAGE
Earth Observation (EO) and Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) are invaluable
tools for the transition to smart, connected and climate-neutral cities. City authorities,
urban planners, real estate agencies, cultural heritage managers and surveyors all use
solutions powered by EO and GNSS to perform a wide range of applications.
EO provides valuable information in support of urban planning, monitoring of informal
dwellings, and informing the progress and state of urban greening. Moreover, EO-based
services provide essential information on air quality in urban environments, measuring
particles that might affect the heath of citizens and monitoring greenhouse gas emissions.
This is also critical when monitoring cultural heritage sites, whereby the impact of air
quality and potential ground subsidence may endanger these sites.
GNSS-based solutions are also used, in conjunction with EO, to accurately survey and
map urban areas and to build advanced 3D models of the built environment.
What you can read in this chapter
• Key trends: EO and GNSS data and services enable sustainable and resilient cities.
• User perspective: Advanced mapping, modelling, and simulation enable informed
decisions and efficient and effective planning.
• Industry: Urban development and cultural heritage value chains.
• Recent developments: Advanced technologies improve the precision and versatile
applicability of GNSS, and EO and GNSS data support monitoring and planning of
urban areas for improved resilience and sustainability.
• Future market evolution: Integration of GNSS with further sensors and signals will
increase precision and availability of location-based services and information. EO data
forms the basis for applications supporting the sustainability of urban spaces and
preservation of cultural heritage sites.
• European systems: The EU Space Programme presents a strong value proposition for
urban development and cultural heritage applications.
• European projects: Several European-funded projects combine EO and GNSS to
propose solutions in support of the urban development & cultural heritage sector.
• Reference charts: Yearly evolution of installed base of GNSS devices and revenues as
well as EO revenues by application and region.
© iStock
* applications with particular relevance for cultural
heritage monitoringSmart Cities Operations
• Smart streetlights
• Smart waste managementEnvironmental Monitoring
• Air quality monitoring in urban
environments*
• Light pollution
• Thermal auditing
• Urban greening
• Urban heat islandsUrban Planning
• Informal dwellings
• Real estate*
• Surveying and mapping of urban areas*
• Urban modelling, 3D modelling, Digital
Twins*
• Urban planning*Legend
EO application
GNSS application
Synergetic application
(combined use of EO and GNSS)
182 Application descriptions can be found in Annex 3.
URBAN DEVELOPMENT & CULTURAL HERITAGE183EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
KEY TRENDS
Satellite data enabling the ‘15-minute city’, where most necessities and
services are in walking distance
In today's world, characterised by growing populations, urbanisation, and the pressing challenges of climate
change and sustainability, urban planning is crucial to live up to these challenges. Developments and trends in
urban planning are influenced by significant policy initiatives like the EU Green Deal and the UN Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), which emphasise the need for more sustainable and resilient cities.
One emerging urban planning concept gaining renewed attention is the 15-minute city. This idea
revolves around creating urban environments where all essential amenities are conveniently accessible
within a short walking distance or a quick bicycle ride. This concept is not new, but it has regained
prominence due to its alignment with the goals of sustainability and resilience.
To turn this vision into reality, cities must embrace integrated urban design and transportation
planning. This holistic approach seeks to reshape urban areas, ensuring that they are more efficient,
equitable, and environmentally friendly.
In this transformation journey, satellite imagery and GNSS play a crucial and growing role. They aid
in redesigning and operating cities efficiently. Satellite imagery helps with mapping and geospatial
planning, providing valuable insights into urban landscapes and potential areas for improvement. GNSS
technology facilitates precise navigation and location-based information, enabling urban mobility and
location-based services to thrive.
EO data guides the resilient design of urban spaces, and provides information
for early warning and response to disasters
In the face of climate change and the increasing frequency of extreme weather events, urban areas
must adapt to these evolving challenges. Here, urban development carries a dual responsibility: not only
must it support the mitigation of such events, but it also must take proactive steps towards prevention
through the design and the implementation of robust information systems.
EO data emerges as a vital asset in this effort. It facilitates the assessment of vulnerability in urban
spaces to a range of natural hazards, including floods and the formation of urban heat islands. EO data
is instrumental in identifying high-risk areas and offering valuable insights into the potential impact of
these hazards on urban communities.
The wealth of information stemming from EO data aids in the creation of resilient urban spaces that can
withstand, or even minimise, the impact of natural disasters. Furthermore, this data supports informed
decision-making during disaster response and recovery efforts, ensuring that resources are allocated
efficiently and effectively to aid affected communities in a timely manner.
Urban regeneration benefits from satellite imagery in identification, planning,
and monitoring areas of concern
In the wake of urban deprivation and the aftermath of armed conflicts, many large urban areas can
find themselves in a state of disrepair, decline or even significant destruction. However, within these
challenges lies a unique opportunity for transformation. Urban planners and developers can seize
the chance to redesign entire neighbourhoods, establish new public spaces, and repurpose existing
structures to adapt to evolving realities and needs.
In this transformative process, EO data has a key role. Collected through satellites, drones, or on-site
sensors, this data serves as a valuable source for detecting signs of urban decline, mapping the
extent of destruction, and providing essential geospatial information for effective urban planning
and development. When combined with GNSS data, it offers a comprehensive understanding of the
urban landscape, empowering urban planners and stakeholders to make informed decisions, driving
sustainable recovery and development.
In this context, the demand for EO data is on the rise due to the imperative nature of recovery plans
and development aid. These initiatives drive the need for accurate and up-to-date information for both
initial planning as well as ongoing monitoring of progress and impact. Simultaneously, the integration
of EO data can lead to cost savings for local municipalities by enhancing their ability to monitor, plan and
manage their urban assets efficiently.
EO-based geospatial data help manage Cultural Heritage
"Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable" is one of the 17 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDG) defined by the United Nations in its "2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development". To achieve this goal, it is necessary to ensure adequate protection and management of
the tangible cultural heritage, which is an inherent component of the urban landscape and has a role
to play in urban regeneration and sustainable development.
To this respect, cultural heritage managers can count on geospatial information. In particular, beyond the
role they can play in discovering new archaeological sites, satellite-based EO data enable the provision
of services informing Cultural Heritage managers about the environmental conditions surrounding the
sites they are responsible for (e.g. air pollution, vegetation growth), about the risks they are exposed
to, whether natural (e.g. ground motion, extreme weather events) or anthropogenic (e.g. urban sprawl,
mass tourism), and about their evolution in time.
EO and GNSS data and services enable sustainable and resilient cities
Key market trends
• In light of growing populations and increasing urbanisation, efforts to make urban spaces more sustainable, but also resilient and inclusive are underway
• Efforts putting cities at the forefront of sustainability and resilience are largely driven by the growing awareness for changes in the environment, the role of human activities contributing to these, and
the impact of these changes on the planet and life on it
• Policies and initiatives such as the EU Green Deal, the Urban Agenda for the EU, or the United Nations’ Sustainability Development Goals (SDGs) are targeting resilience, sustainability, and recovery and
regeneration with urban areas in focus. Enforcing these policies is enabled by means of digitalisation and increasingly so by geospatial data, with the European Space Programme's assets on the forefront
184URBAN DEVELOPMENT & CULTURAL HERITAGE
USER PERSPECTIVE
Key EO and GNSS user requirements
The key EO and GNSS user requirements for the different application groups within the urban
development and cultural heritage segment are, at EU level, collected using a harmonised procedure.
Information is collected through extensive interactions with user groups, providers and experts in a
continuous process culminating at the User Consultation Platforms (UCP). Requirements relevant for
the Urban Development & Cultural Heritage segment are documented in detail within the Reports on
Infrastructure, Emergency Management, or Consumer Solutions. User requirements for EO services and
products – as well as their evolution – are now also collected through the UCP. The process covers the
EO user needs and requirements of commercial users based on inputs from industry experts and user
groups, mirroring the existing process implemented for GNSS.
Moreover, the collection of specific requirements for Copernicus services and products is supported by
an integrated process that involves different channels: (i) dedicated studies (e.g. "NEXTSPACE" project,
"Copernicus for EC (C4EC)" study, Commission Staff Working Document on user needs); (ii) targeted
consultations organised by the European Commission or the entrusted entities with the relevant
communities; and (iii) regular and structured exchanges among representatives of the Copernicus
governance structure and Member States through the Copernicus User Forum.
The Copernicus Land User Event is another example of formats through which user feedback is collected
in its 2023 urban applications session, revealing needs such as customised data for specific applications,
more interaction between solution developers or guarantees for reliability and availability of data.
Building Information Modelling (BIM) plays a crucial role in the development
and management of smart cities
For visualisation and analysis of spatial data in urban areas, for example, as well as for the management
of urban spaces, Geographic Information Systems (GIS) have many established applications in, for
example, urban planning, emergency management, or real estate management. Managing spaces and
built structures and the complex systems they create however benefits from additional information on
building level. Building Information Modelling (BIM) is an emerging tool which, when integrated with
GIS and geospatial data, has the potential to enhance modelling of urban spaces and the applications
that rely on such data and information.
BIM is an increasingly important tool in modern urban development. It revolves around creating
digital representations of physical spaces, complete with their unique characteristics. These Building
Information Models are instrumental in streamlining urban design processes, offering efficient solutions.
Given the ongoing digitalisation of areas such as architecture, construction and engineering, new
constructions already come with rich data describing their properties. By means of digitalisation,
BIM can also be applied to existing buildings and built structures though. The models created provide a
foundation for the development of smart cities and enable in-depth analysis and automation, paving
the way for more intelligent and responsive urban environments.
To elevate BIM's capabilities further, the integration of EO and geospatial data into BIM tools adds a
new dimension of accuracy and detail. This combination provides essential and more holistic information
for urban planning and analysis, enabling cities and their stakeholders to make informed decisions and
optimise their development strategies.
EO supports decision-making for cultural heritage management
In most countries, the challenges posed by the geopolitical and economic situation on the one hand,
and global warming on the other hand, reduce available budgets and human resources devoted to the
preservation of cultural heritage. In this context, cultural heritage managers often have to establish
priorities for the preservation and restoration of the sites under their responsibility. These priorities may
have to be established at different levels, from local to national. To make informed decision, managers
need reliable information not only on the current status of cultural heritage settlements but also on
the risks threatening those settlements. With its global coverage and the wide variety of parameters it
monitors, satellite-based EO enables a comparison of the conditions and risks between different sites
(e.g. comparison for several Cultural Heritage sites throughout a country or a region, of the risks related
to, for example, subsidence, erosion, drought or floods). By doing so, EO helps managers to better plan
conservation operations while optimizing the use of resources.
Advanced mapping, modelling, and simulation enable informed decisions
and efficient and effective planning
URBAN DEVELOPMENT & CULTURAL HERITAGE185EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
INDUSTRY
CUSTOMERS
OF SURVEYING
SERVICES
PROFESSIONAL
USERS
SOFTWARE,
APPLICATIONS
AND ADDED VALUE
SERVICES
SYSTEM
INTEGRATORS
COMPONENT
AND RECEIVER
MANUFACTURERS
AUGMENTATION
SERVICE PROVIDERS
• HEXAGON (LEICA
GEOSYSTEMS, NOVATEL)*
• SPACEOPAL*
• SWIFT NAVIGATION
• TERIA*
• TOPCON
• TRIMBLE NAVIGATION
• U-BLOX*
• BEIJING UNISTRONG
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY
• CHCNAV
• HEXAGON*
• HI-TARGET SURVEYING
INSTRUMENT
• SATEL*
• SBG SYSTEMS*
• SEPTENTRIO*
• TOPCON
• TRIMBLE NAVIGATION
• U-BLOX*
• ALLSAT*
• CHCNAV
• EATON*
• HEXAGON*
• RACELOGIC*
• STONEX*
• CARLSON
• HEXAGON*
• JAVAD GNSS
• SEPTENTRIO*
• TOPCON
• TRIMBLE NAVIGATION
• CONSTRUCTORS
• EDUCATORS
• ENGINEERS
• ENVIRONMENTALISTS
• PRESERVATIONISTS
• SCIENTISTS
• SURVEYORS
• ARCHITECTS
• CONSTRUCTION
COMPANIES
• INSURERS
• CITIZENS
• PUBLIC AUTHORITIES
• URBAN UTILITIES
• NATIONAL AND
REGIONAL RTK NETWORK
PROVIDERS
Urban Development & Cultural Heritage EO & GNSS Value Chain1
END USERS
INFORMATION
PROVIDERS
EO PRODUCTS
AND SERVICE
PROVIDERS
PLATFORM
PROVIDERS
INFRASTRUCTURE
PROVIDERS
DATA PROVIDERS
• AIRBUS*
• BLACKSKY
• CAPELLA SPACE
• CONSTELLR*
• GEOSAT*
• ICEYE*
• E-GEOS*
• MAXAR
• PLANET
• SATELLOGIC*
• UMBRA
• AWS
• CLOUDFERRO*
• GOOGLE CLOUD
PLATFORM
• IBM CLOUD
• MICROSOFT AZURE
• T-SYSTEMS*
• CLOUDEO*
• CREODIAS*
• EARTH-I*
• EDS CEODE
• EURODATACUBE*
• GOOGLE EARTH ENGINE
• NORTH.IO*
• OPEN DATA CUBE
• PLANET EXPLORER
• SENTINEL-HUB*
(SINERGISE)
• UP42*
• AIRBUS*
• ESRI
• GAF*
• GAMMA REMOTE SENSING*
• GEOVILLE*
• KSAT*
• OHB*
• PLANETEK*
• SINERGISE (PLANET)
• TESSELO*
• VITO*
• WORLD FROM SPACE*
• 21AT
• CGI
• CONSTELLR*
• GAF*
• GENEGIS GI*
• KERMAP*
• LUXCARTA*
• NAIS*
• SATSENSE*
• SPACEKNOW
• TETRA TECH
• TRACASA*
• URBAN PLANNERS
• ARCHITECTS
• CONSTRUCTION
COMPANIES
• URBAN PUBLIC
TRANSPORT PROVIDERS
• PUBLIC AUTHORITIES
(HEALTH, ENVIRONMENT,
CULTURE)
• ENGINEERING COMPANIES
• CITIZENS
• UTILITY COMPANIES
• REAL ESTATE AGENCIES
• INSURANCE COMPANIES
• INTERNATIONAL
ORGANISATIONS
(E.G. UNITED NATIONS,
UNESCO)
• TAX AUTHORITIES
• COPERNICUS SENTINELS*
• LANDSAT (USGS)
• METEOSAT (EUMETSAT)*
• RADARSAT (CSA)
• RELEVANT IN-SITU
NETWORKS
• OTHER RELEVANT
EUROPEAN NATIONAL
MISSIONS
• FEDERATED
INFRASTRUCTURE
(E.G. GAIA-X)*
• SENTINEL COLLABORATIVE
GROUND SEGMENT*
• CODE-DE*
• COPERNICUS DATASPACE
ECOSYSTEM*
• ESA TEP (URBAN)*
• OPENEO*
• WEKEO*
• COPERNICUS ATMOSPHERE
MONITORING SERVICE (CAMS)*
• COPERNICUS CLIMATE CHANGE
SERVICE (C3S)*
• COPERNICUS EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT SERVICE (CEMS)*
• COPERNICUS LAND MONITORING
SERVICE (CLMS)*, INCL. COPERNICUS
EUROPEAN GROUND MONITORING
SERVICE (EGMS)*
• COPERNICUS SECURITY SERVICE (CSS)*
NOTES
1 The value chain considers the key global and European companies involved in GNSS and EO downstream activities.
Please note that enterprises listed in the data providers step of the value chain often provide platforms as a service.
For the sake of simplicity, the data providers are not repeated in other stages of the value chain in which they are active.
2 In the market share analysis, Europe is defined as EU27 plus Norway, Switzerland and the UK.
Please refer to page 13 and 23 for a comprehensive description of value chains and how to interpret them at segment level.
* European-based companies. The region is defined with respect to the headquarters of the company, though the actual area
of activity might be wider.
LEGEND
Commercial offering
Public offering / entities
User segments
European2 EO and GNSS industry in the global arena
While EO data processing markets are dominated by North American and Asian
companies with increasing market shares, European countries still account for over
a quarter of the market. Here, leading European companies include Airbus and
Leonardo (e-GEOS).
GNSS receivers in urban development and cultural heritage are used for mapping
and cadastral purposes, while the infrastructure segment covers devices for post-
construction purposes. Companies such as Hexagon, SBG Systems and Septentrio
are leaders in Europe for components and receivers, and systems integration.
EARTH
OBSERVATION
GNSS
186URBAN DEVELOPMENT & CULTURAL HERITAGE
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
1 000
2 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
RTK Network Devices Surveying and mapping of urban areas Commercial Augmentation Services*
* Commercial Augmentation Services also include revenue from applications in Energy and Raw Materials and
Infrastructures segments. Commercial Augmentation Services from applications in Agriculture segment are captured
in the chart for Agriculture.
0
5
10
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
RTK Network Devices Surveying and mapping of urban areas
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Cutting edge technologies are enhanced with GNSS information and
vice versa to improve the precision and versatile applicability of GNSS
Shipments of GNSS receivers for surveying and mapping have grown from over 110 000 units in 2012
to more than 290 000 in 2022.
A drop of shipments can be seen after 2020 (where shipments peaked at around 418 000 devices), with
continuous recovery since. This drop can likely be attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic which resulted
in both a strong decline in construction in 2021 as well as disruptions of supply chains.
Shipments of RTK network devices have tripled since 2012 to around 5 800 devices in 2022. With a
median of around 3 700 units per year between 2010 and 2022, shipment numbers of such devices are
relatively low.
Fewer unit sales of RTK network devices meant that prices were maintained at a high level and lifetimes
were increased in order to maintain moderate growth rates.
Augmented Reality enhances decision-making and public engagement
in urban planning and transportation
High-precision design overlays in real-world urban settings offer the ability to create precise
visualisations of planned construction projects. Georeferenced models are seamlessly positioned
using measurements relative to property boundaries or other site reference points.
This flexibility allows for on-site adjustments and reorientations of models as needed. Cutting-edge
Augmented Reality (AR) solutions empower engineers, architects, and construction professionals to
plan and execute projects on-site with remarkable precision. These tools not only enhance accuracy
but also streamline the entire construction process, ensuring that urban development projects align
seamlessly with their intended designs.
Furthermore, AR can integrate real-time data feeds, such as traffic information, public transportation
schedules, and environmental data, into the urban environment. These data can be presented as
overlays on devices, helping commuters and planners make informed choices about transportation
options, routes, parking etc., reducing congestion and improving overall mobility. Here, GNSS
provides the geospatial context in terms of accurate positioning, alignment with real-world surroundings
and proximity alerts, for example.
Floating Car Data (FCD)-based traffic services offer benefits for transportation
and urban planning
Anonymous location data collected from various mobile sources, including apps, cars and devices, can
be seamlessly integrated into urban planning, traffic information systems and other urban applications.
Integrated with GNSS information, it provides precise location details, real-time environmental
monitoring, disaster response capabilities, infrastructure assessment and valuable insights for urban
expansion. This integration serves as a powerful tool for enhancing urban mobility and traffic
management, while also contributing to smarter urban planning.
By harnessing this wealth of data, traffic information systems can provide users with real-time travel
times for routes they have defined. This means that individuals can make informed decisions about their
journeys based on current traffic conditions, helping to reduce congestion and improve overall urban
transportation efficiency. Moreover, real-time floating car data integrated with GNSS information,
empowers traffic management authorities to take proactive measures. These measures may include
automatically adjusting signal plans, redirecting traffic flow or implementing other strategies to optimise
urban mobility and minimise congestion, all of which are critical components of effective urban planning.
This integrated approach supports data-driven decisions, promoting sustainability, resilience and
efficiency in cities while addressing a wide range of urban planning challenges beyond traffic
management.
Shipments of GNSS devices by application
URBAN DEVELOPMENT & CULTURAL HERITAGE187EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
Satellite data supports monitoring and planning of urban areas, contributing
to improved resilience, sustainability, and preservation of cultural heritage
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Urban resilience monitoring and planning is improving preparedness, safety,
sustainability, and cost
The intersection of urban land use, climate change, and other factors exposes vulnerabilities, particularly
in the context of extreme weather events like heatwaves, droughts and floods. EO capabilities and
applications offer holistic solutions to address these challenges.
EO-enabled monitoring solutions not only provide timely response capabilities, empowering emergency
services to react swiftly during crises but also enable in-depth analysis of conditions. EO data plays a
pivotal role in predicting events and guiding longer-term interventions. For instance, it aids in strategic
planning related to water bodies, green spaces, urban layout adjustments, and even the potential
relocation of communities to safer areas.
Leveraging existing EO capabilities like the European Ground Motion Service, which offers insights into
natural and human-induced ground motion, and the Global Human Settlement Layer, which provides
global geospatial information on human settlements, supports comprehensive risk assessment and
crisis management efforts. These tools, coupled with EO data, collectively contribute to building more
resilient and adaptable urban environments in the face of evolving challenges, ensuring the safety and
well-being of urban populations.
EO contributes to the restoration of cultural heritage in conflict areas
During armed conflicts, tangible cultural heritage is very often part of collateral damages and suffers
looting and degradation, if not complete destruction.
An emerging EO application is the creation of digital inventories of cultural heritage sites in war zones
(which UNESCO is currently doing to keep track of damage to Ukraine's cultural heritage sites).
The comparison of satellite images before and after malicious acts in areas affected by conflicts, enables
the identification of damaged or destroyed areas as well as the assessment and classification of the
level of degradation. Several initiatives are also springing up to supplement the information obtained
via space-based observations with local information provided either by specialists on site or by citizens
taking pictures.
Increasingly used by national and international organisations, this type of application makes it possible
to document damages, serve as evidence and constitute a basis for post-conflict reconstruction, from
local-scale to country-scale. It also helps to raise awareness among the general public.
For 2022, revenues from EO data & services sales have reached almost €400 million. By far the largest
share of these revenues (over 35%) stems from applications in surveying and mapping. This is followed
by urban planning and air quality monitoring applications, both of which had a slight growth in shares
and total revenues compared to the year before. The increase in shares of applications other than
surveying and mapping indicates a wider adoption of EO by new user groups. Urban heat is another
strong trend, with many municipalities appointing heat officers. Light pollution applications are also on
the rise, serving as indicators for different thematic areas such as energy or cultural heritage.
About 75% of the revenues are generated by services, only 25% by data. One of the drivers of this is a
trend of more open data availability due to which the proportional value of services is expected to
further increase.
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
Surveying and mapping of urban areas
Urban modeling, 3D modeling, digital twins
Air quality monitoring in urban environments
Light pollution
2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 0
100
200
300
400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (mi
12%
37%
9%
11%
11%
12%
3% 5%
€395 million
Urban planning
Surveying and mapping of urban areas
Informal dwellings
Urban modeling, 3D modeling, digital twins
Real Estate
Air quality monitoring in urban environments
Light pollution
Urban Heat Islands
Revenues from EO data & services sales by application 2022
188URBAN DEVELOPMENT & CULTURAL HERITAGE
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
Integration of GNSS with further sensors and signals will increase precision
and availability of location-based services and information
Shipments of GNSS devices by region
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Shipments of GNSS devices by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
2033
aribbean
0
200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
RTK Network Devices Surveying and mapping of urban areas Commercial Augmentation Services*
* Commercial Augmentation Services also include revenue from applications in Energy and Raw Materials and
Infrastructures segments. Commercial Augmentation Services from applications in Agriculture segment are captured
in the chart for Agriculture.
2022
The anticipated growth in unit shipments is scaling from approximately 316 000 in the year 2023 to
more than 500 000 units by 2033. A substantial portion of devices is expected to be deployed for
applications in surveying and mapping.
However, it is noteworthy that this growth projection is lower compared to prior forecasts. The
recalibration takes into consideration updated assumptions regarding the extended life expectancy
of the devices.
Asia remains the biggest market for GNSS devices. Over the span of the next decade, it is anticipated
to grow from nearly 167 000 shipped units in 2023 to an estimated 300 000 units in the year 2033.
For comparison, shipments in the EU27 are expected to see a more moderate growth, reaching an
estimated 35 000 units by 2033.
Enhancing location-based services – Tightly-Coupled Inertial Visual GNSS
leads the way
Buildings and other structures in cities can create “urban canyons” that pose challenges to GNSS signals,
potentially affecting positioning and navigation accuracy. To mitigate these issues, the integration of
GNSS-RTK or PPP with inertial navigation systems (INS) is considered a viable solution. The inclusion of
a visual component can further enhance the accuracy of these systems.
Tightly-coupled solutions, which consolidate multiple data sources into a single optimisation problem, are
crucial for robust urban navigation. This fusion of data can include GNSS, inertial sensors and visual data.
LiDAR-based simultaneous localisation and mapping (SLAM) approaches are effective but often come
with high costs and power consumption, making them less practical for some urban applications. As a
more cost-effective alternative, monocular visual inertial SLAM systems have been proposed.
Moreover, the utilisation of various visual sensors such as cameras is gaining traction. These sensors
can improve the overall performance of tightly-coupled inertial visual GNSS systems.
When applied to urban planning, tightly-coupled inertial visual GNSS systems can overcome service
interruptions caused by urban canyons, substantially increase positioning precision, and enhance the
availability of location-based services. Additionally, these systems play a critical role in enabling the
development of autonomous vehicles and aerial systems within urban environments, contributing to
safer and more efficient urban transportation.
Preserving the past and paving the future: LEO-enhanced 3D mapping-
aided GNSS for Smart Cities and cultural heritage
3D mapping-aided GNSS integrates information from 3D building models to anticipate the visibility
of satellites. In an urban environment, such information can improve the precision of low-cost
receivers. Measuring sky visibility in real-time can be achieved by tracking Low Earth Orbit (LEO) and
GNSS satellite constellations.
The integration of 3D building models with GNSS technology offers significant advantages for urban
planning. By anticipating satellite visibility and optimising GNSS signal reception through 3D mapping-
aided GNSS, urban planners can make informed decisions about infrastructure development, zoning
and land use. This real-time sky visibility data supports disaster response planning, sustainable
urban design, and smart city initiatives, enhancing the efficiency and liveability of urban areas.
Additionally, it aids in historical preservation efforts and fosters public engagement by visualising
urban changes. In short, this integrated approach empowers urban planners to create more efficient,
resilient and engaging cities.
URBAN DEVELOPMENT & CULTURAL HERITAGE189EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
FUTURE MARKET EVOLUTION
EO data forms the basis for applications supporting the sustainability
of urban spaces and preservation of cultural heritage sites
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Urban planning Surveying and mapping of urban areas
Informal dwellings Urban modeling, 3D modeling, digital twins
Real Estate Air quality monitoring in urban environments
Urban Heat Islands Light pollution
Urban planning Surveying and mapping of urban areas
Informal dwellings Urban modeling, 3D modeling, digital twins
Real Estate Air quality monitoring in urban environments
Urban Heat Islands Light pollution
0
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by application
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
12%
37%
9%
11%
11%
12%
3% 5%
€395 million
Urban planning
Surveying and mapping of urban areas
Informal dwellings
Urban modeling, 3D modeling, digital twins
Real Estate
Air quality monitoring in urban environments
Light pollution
Urban Heat Islands
Revenues from EO data & services sales by application
Estimated revenues from EO data and services sales are expected to grow from about €430 million in
2023 to up to €870 million in 2033. By far the largest share of these revenues (on average 35%) stems
from applications in surveying and mapping.
This is followed by urban planning and air quality monitoring applications, both of which will see
continuous growth in total revenues and also in the shares of revenues across applications. This shift
of larger shares in other applications than surveying and mapping, indicates a wider adoption of EO
by new user groups. Urban heat is a strong trend with many municipalities appointing heat officers in
need for reliable information.
Light pollution applications are also on the rise, serving as indicator for different thematic areas such
as energy or cultural heritage.
Around 75% of the revenues are generated by services, but only 25% by data. This is partly due to the
trend towards more open data, while the proportional value of services is expected to further increase.
Preserving the past with EO-enabled Digital Twin
Digital Twins have the potential to advance the monitoring, management and preservation of our
cultural heritage, especially when integrated with EO data. This synergy offers a transformative approach
to safeguarding our cultural legacy.
Digital Twins, which are virtual replicas of physical assets, can play a crucial role in this transformation.
They allow for simulations, providing real-time insights and enabling predictive analytics. Through this,
Digital Twins empower decision-makers to make informed choices that contribute to more sustainable
and resilient cities.
Crucially, EO data, sourced from satellites and in situ measurements, constitutes a valuable resource of
information about urban environments, both past and present. Through their integration, highly detailed
digital models of cities can be constructed, which not only account for modern infrastructure but also
preserve the historical and cultural heritage that defines a city's unique identity.
Data fusion solutions seamlessly integrate various data sources, including satellite imagery and on-site
measurements, to create comprehensive and up-to-date representations of urban landscapes. Through
this fusion, the Digital Twins become enriched with insights into cultural heritage, ensuring that historic
buildings, archaeological sites, and culturally significant landmarks are meticulously preserved within the
digital realm and, more importantly, provide the required information to ensure their physical preservation.
Growing greener cities: Urban agriculture and gardening for sustainability
Urban agriculture, encompassing traditional farming, vertical gardens and rooftop cultivation, is a
catalyst for social and economic benefits, with its potential spanning food security, resource efficiency,
and sustainability. It addresses challenges such as pollution reduction and energy conservation by
streamlining delivery and storage practices.
EO plays a pivotal role in monitoring and optimising these diverse urban cultivation methods. It
provides valuable insights into crop health, water usage and land utilisation patterns, empowering
urban farmers to adopt more efficient and sustainable agricultural methods, whether they are growing
in soil or in vertical systems.
Furthermore, Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and EO data, including local climate and weather
information, assist in site selection for these varied urban cultivation projects. By leveraging these tools,
urban planners can identify ideal locations that align with climate conditions and resource availability,
further enhancing the sustainability of urban farming and vertical gardening initiatives.
Urban agriculture, with its diverse forms and enabled by EO technology, transforms cities into hubs of
sustainable food and greenery production, promoting resilience and environmental stewardship.
190URBAN DEVELOPMENT & CULTURAL HERITAGE
EUROPEAN SYSTEMS
Current usage of EGNSS
Galileo services and features have proven to be crucial tools for urban
planners and cultural heritage management professionals in ensuring
precise positioning, safety, integrity, and efficient coordination of activities
within urban areas and historic sites.
The High Accuracy Service (HAS) of Galileo can be beneficial for urban
planning and documenting cultural heritage sites by providing improved
accuracy for creating detailed topographic maps, identifying property
boundaries, and conducting land surveys.
Urban planners can benefit from this technology by quickly and accurately
assessing the impact of proposed construction projects or existing
infrastructure. In addition, Galileo improves accuracy of surveying in
urban canyons, where high buildings may obstruct visibility of satellites.
The system’s navigation features can assist in navigating through urban
areas and cultural heritage sites by providing accurate positioning, route
planning, and real-time guidance.
Current usage of Copernicus
The Copernicus programme supports urban planning and monitoring through its satellite and in situ data as well as
through its services such as the Copernicus Land Monitoring Service (CLMS) (e.g. with its Urban Atlas).
The CLMS is also critical for monitoring of cultural heritage, identifying and mapping risks such as coastal erosion or
ground subsidence. CLMS’ European Ground Motion Service (EGMS) for instance enables investigation of ground motion
affecting buildings and linear infrastructures.
In addition, the Copernicus Emergency Management Service (CEMS) provides a range of products related to natural
and man-made disasters that can affect the urban environment (e.g. floods, landslides).
Additional value is provided by the Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service (CAMS) (e.g. with its air quality forecasts
and particulate matter measurements) and the Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) (e.g. with data on urban
heat). Both these services support the preservation and maintenance of cultural heritage by enabling the assessment of
sites' vulnerability regarding climate change effects (e.g. heat waves, sea level rise).
The Copernicus Service in Support to EU External Action (SEA) – a service of the Copernicus Security Service (CSS) –
among other provides support in monitoring damages to world cultural heritage in areas affected by armed conflicts.
The service can assess potential damage to cultural heritage sites over areas of conflict inaccessible to the international
community. The Copernicus SEA Service can only be activated by authorised users.
Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2 data can be applied to building height detection. Sentinel-2 is further applied to mapping
green urban areas, urban sprawl, and classification of (urban) land use. Sentinel-1 also supports InSAR monitoring
of urban infrastructure such as tunnels, bridges and roads, identifying potential displacement or ground movement.
Sentinel-3 provides Land Surface Temperature (LST) data, applicable to the detection of urban heat islands; Sentinel-2
surface reflectance data can further improve LST resolution. Finally, Sentinel-5P measurements support the monitoring
of air quality in urban environments.
The EU Space Programme presents a strong value proposition
for urban development and cultural heritage applications
High accuracy
service Multi-
Open service
frequency
Greater
Availability Higher
Accuracy
Greater
Continuity
GalileoGalileo
EGNOS
Sentinels
Sentinel-1 Sentinel-2 Sentinel-3
Copernicus Services
Terminology used on this page is explained in Annex 2 for both GNSS and EO performance parameters.
Atmosphere
CAMS
Climate
C3S
Land
CLMS
Emergency
CEMS
Security
CSS
Sentinel-5P
URBAN DEVELOPMENT & CULTURAL HERITAGE191EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
EUROPEAN PROJECTS
Several European-funded projects combine EO and GNSS to propose
solutions in support of the Urban Development & Cultural Heritage sector
Galileo Improved Services for Cadastral Augmentation
Development On-field Validation – GISCAD-OV
Cadastral surveying focuses on establishing and re-establishing property boundaries, tracking
changes due to construction or demolition, and updating cadastral maps. It plays a crucial role in
legally defining property rights and maintaining national land registries.
The GISCAD-OV project aimed to improve cadastral surveying by involving the entire industry
chain. It developed a cost-effective high-accuracy service (HAS) using GPS+Galileo E6 HAS
and precise point positioning-ambiguity resolution (PPP-AR) techniques. It further aimed to
establish a GISCAD-OV Service Operator Centre, integrating existing infrastructures to enhance
Cadastral operations' efficiency and reduce citizen-facing procedure times.
GISCAD-OV's approach included upgrading commercial GNSS receivers, utilising low-cost
augmentation services, and developing a viable business model for widespread Cadastral HAS
implementation.
GISCAD-OV intends to create new business opportunities in cadastral surveying by leveraging
Galileo's HAS corrections broadcasting for improved service differentiation.
More information available at: http://www.giscad-ov.eu
Community-Based Smart City Digital Twin Platform for Optimised
DRM operations and Enhanced Community Disaster Resilience – PANTHEON
PANTHEON aims to create a community-based digital ecosystem for disaster resilience
using Smart City Digital Twin technology and cutting-edge innovations. The project focuses on
improving risk assessment, reducing vulnerability and enhancing community disaster resilience.
It will achieve this by establishing a community-based smart city digital twin environment for
simulations, training, and evaluating subsystem behaviour and threats.
PANTHEON also includes early detection and situational awareness tools, collaborative sensing
from earth observations, and UAVs for disaster assistance.
The PANTHEON platform integrates IoT infrastructure and multi-source data to assess risks,
inform decision-makers and the public, engage stakeholders, and promote comprehensive
disaster risk assessments, all while fostering international cooperation and data sharing.
The Smart City Digital Twin technology will facilitate collective community behaviour analysis
concerning exposure to urban multi-hazards over time and space.
More information available at: https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/101074008
HYPERION – Decision support system for improved resilience & sustainable
reconstruction of historic areas
HYPERION is a four-year EU-funded project which provided tools enabling a better
understanding of the effects of climate change, extreme weather conditions, the ravages of
time and intense geological phenomena on Cultural Heritage monuments.
Based on the hygrothermal, structural and geotechnical analysis of cultural heritage sites and
on the combination of monitoring and simulated data, the project provided proper adaptation
and mitigation strategies, and supported sustainable reconstruction plans for damaged sites.
The vulnerability maps produced by HYPERION have helped local authorities assess climate change
threats, visualise the built heritage and cultural landscape under future climate scenarios, model the
effects of different adaptation strategies, and ultimately prioritise any rehabilitation actions.
The outcomes of the project were demonstrated in four historic areas located in Greece, Italy,
Norway and Spain and having different climatic characteristics.
More information available at: www.hyperion-project.eu
SIGNATURE – Mapping endangered cultural soilscapes in post-conflict
through EO, AI and geoarchaeological signatures
SIGNATURE is a two-year EU-funded project which investigates the long-term settlement and
land use dynamics that shaped the cultural soilscapes of the Levant with the objective to identify
archaeological sites subject to recent agricultural encroachment or abrupt land disturbances.
The project combines EO big data, AI and geoarchaeological signatures to accurately map and
predict the location of anthropogenic soils and landforms, monitor historical and present-day
land use trends, and identify acute landscape transformations endangering the preservation of
vulnerable archaeological and heritage assets.
SIGNATURE will produce and share a comprehensive set of comparable data and reproducible
tools for the study and management of endangered cultural landscapes, likely to be adapted and
implemented by scholars and cultural heritage practitioners working in conflict and post-conflict
regions.
More information available at: https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/101067100
Horizon Europe,
a programme of the
European Union
Horizon Europe,
a programme of the
European Union
192URBAN DEVELOPMENT & CULTURAL HERITAGE
REFERENCE CHARTS
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
Revenue from GNSS device sales and services by region Revenue from GNSS device sales and services by application
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
9 000
10 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
3 000
3 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
0
200
400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
RTK Network Devices Surveying and mapping of urban areas Commercial Augmentation Services*
* Commercial Augmentation Services also include revenue from applications in Energy and Raw Materials and
Infrastructures segments. Commercial Augmentation Services from applications in Agriculture segment are captured
in the chart for Agriculture.
0
50
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
RTK Network Devices Surveying and mapping of urban areas
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
3 000
3 500
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
9 000
10 000
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by application
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
9 000
10 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
3 000
3 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
0
200
400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
RTK Network Devices Surveying and mapping of urban areas Commercial Augmentation Services*
* Commercial Augmentation Services also include revenue from applications in Energy and Raw Materials and
Infrastructures segments. Commercial Augmentation Services from applications in Agriculture segment are captured
in the chart for Agriculture.
0
50
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
RTK Network Devices Surveying and mapping of urban areas
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
3 000
3 500
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
9 000
10 000
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by application
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
9 000
10 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
3 000
3 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
0
200
400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
RTK Network Devices Surveying and mapping of urban areas Commercial Augmentation Services*
* Commercial Augmentation Services also include revenue from applications in Energy and Raw Materials and
Infrastructures segments. Commercial Augmentation Services from applications in Agriculture segment are captured
in the chart for Agriculture.
0
50
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
RTK Network Devices Surveying and mapping of urban areas
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
3 000
3 500
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
9 000
10 000
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by application
0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
9 000
10 000
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
0
500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
3 000
3 500
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by region
0
200
400
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
RTK Network Devices Surveying and mapping of urban areas Commercial Augmentation Services*
* Commercial Augmentation Services also include revenue from applications in Energy and Raw Materials and
Infrastructures segments. Commercial Augmentation Services from applications in Agriculture segment are captured
in the chart for Agriculture.
0
50
100
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
RTK Network Devices Surveying and mapping of urban areas
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
3 000
3 500
Units (thousands)
Installed base of GNSS devices by application
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
8 000
9 000
10 000
€ (millions)
Revenue of GNSS device sales and services by application
URBAN DEVELOPMENT & CULTURAL HERITAGE193EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
REFERENCE CHARTS
Revenue from EO data sales by application
Revenue from EO services sales by application
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
€ (millions)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
Urban planning Surveying and mapping of urban areas
Informal dwellings Urban modeling, 3D modeling, digital twins
Real Estate Air quality monitoring in urban environments
Urban Heat Islands Light pollution
Urban planning Surveying and mapping of urban areas
Informal dwellings Urban modeling, 3D modeling, digital twins
Real Estate Air quality monitoring in urban environments
Urban Heat Islands Light pollution
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
€ (millions)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by application
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
€ (millions)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by application
Urban planning Surveying and mapping of urban areas
Informal dwellings Urban modeling, 3D modeling, digital twins
Real Estate Air quality monitoring in urban environments
Urban Heat Islands Light pollution
Urban planning Surveying and mapping of urban areas
Informal dwellings Urban modeling, 3D modeling, digital twins
Real Estate Air quality monitoring in urban environments
Urban Heat Islands Light pollution
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
Revenue from EO data sales by region
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
ts
ts
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO data sales by region
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
EU27 Non-EU27 Europe North America
Asia-Pacific Middle East + Africa South America + Caribbean
ts
ts
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033
€ (millions)
Revenue from EO services sales by region
Revenue from EO data & services sales by region
“Space systems and services in the EU contribute to the strategic autonomy of the EU
and its Member States. They are key assets that will contribute to shaping the future
competitiveness, prosperity and security of the EU for next generations.”
“The functioning of economies, citizens and public policies increasingly relies on space-
related services and data, including those in the field of security and defence.”
In line with these citations from the EU Space Strategy for Security and Defence (SSSD),
this year’s Editor Special will explore the concept of resilient societies and illustrate
through a limited selection of example use cases how EO and GNSS, but also EU Space
Programme Components – EGNSS and Copernicus1 – are contributing to building a more
resilient society.
The concept of "resilient societies" as defined in this chapter encompasses all non-
military activities aimed at safeguarding people, their possessions, the environment, the
economy and the organisation of our societies against hostile or rogue actors, as well as
managing other threats, risks and hazards that could imperil life or belongings.
Such activities, which are not discussed in the previous chapters of this report, typically
fall within the remit of several government entities and can be identified across multiple
domains, including border management, maritime surveillance, justice actions, diplomacy
and international relations and police operations.
The following pages present a small selection of use cases that illustrate the versatility
and potential of space technologies in supporting resilient societies. While these
examples are by no means exhaustive, they serve to emphasise the broad utility of these
technologies and to highlight opportunities for further development.
1 The GNSS and EO report does not discuss the valuable contributions that Satcom, including secure
Satcom, can provide to resilient societies. For further information on this matter, please consult the
EUSPA Secure Satcom User Technology Report discussed on page 24.
EDITOR’S SPECIAL:
RESILIENT SOCIETIES
© iStock
© iStock
© iStock© iStock
194
RESILIENT SOCIETIES195EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
Borders – land, sea, physical or digital – constitute the interface between distinct national legislations
and identities, and border crossing points are convenient places at which to control the movement of
goods and people in order to protect the territory, citizens and the economic and financial interests of
a country.
Customs operations predominantly focus on the management of goods1, yet customs operate in the
broader context of border management and often contribute to tasks other than the management of
international trade. In particular, they often participate in the surveillance of land and sea borders, the
control of irregular migration and the fight against smuggling and trafficking.
This expanded role requires customs to work more closely with other relevant policy areas and
organisations, both nationally and internationally.
Customs operations are essential to ensure legitimate cross-border trade and
combat fraud and trafficking
Customs operations enable international trade by allowing the legitimate import, export and transit
of goods. In many countries, customs are the responsibility of the ministry of finance, in line with their
traditional tax collection role. In addition to this focus on taxation, the role of customs has evolved over
time to become a more general approach to controls related to the safety and security of citizens.
In cooperation with other national or international agencies, modern days customs operations include
the protection against terrorist activities, the application of restrictions on the import or export of specific
products, the detection and seizure of prohibited articles, the application of sanitary and phytosanitary
measures, the protection of endangered species and intellectual property rights, the implementation of
foreign exchange restrictions and the monitoring of suspicious cash movements.
The traditional process of assessing and collecting trade taxes relies on the physical inspection of
consignments at points of entry. This task can be complicated by old legislation – often requiring 100%
inspection – and by trade tax policies that involve highly differentiated rates and widespread exemptions.
Procedures governing routine operations, such as establishing accurate import values and checking the
(mis)use of exemptions, can be time and labour-intensive, leading to considerable and unpredictable
delays in clearing consignments through customs. This situation is further complicated by non-tariff
verifications. In short, customs operations can often be a barrier to international trade, resulting in
administrative costs for government and compliance costs for business.
GNSS and EO role in Customs operations
Role of GNSS
GNSS technology contributes to, improves and even enables several customs activities whether in their
core role of managing goods crossing the border - including the enhancement and modernisation of the
relevant procedures - or in their modern expanded role mentioned above.
GNSS enables the tracking and tracing of goods along the supply chain, especially in transit at borders.
It contributes to pre-clearance procedures (FCA - Incoterm Free Carrier - pre-clearance procedures),
the creation of fast corridors facilitating import operations and the implementation of currently paper-
based procedures through electronic data exchange (dematerialisation of procedures). Overall, GNSS
can facilitate trade between partners by avoiding duplication of customs procedures and facilitating the
clearance of goods for import, export and transit.
In the context of the digitalisation of customs clearance procedures, and in particular of eFTI (electronic
Freight Transport Information), GNSS authentication can allow the automatisation of goods clearance,
green lanes or fast corridors, although this capability and potential are not currently being fully exploited.
Role of Earth Observation
Despite their potential, Earth Observation (EO) services are currently under-utilised for the core operation
of goods clearance at the border. However, EO has proven its value for other operations, particularly in
international cooperation to combat illegal activities, e.g. trafficking. For example, the Maritime Analysis
and Operations Centre (Narcotics) (MAOC (N)), in which several European customs agencies participate,
is already using the Copernicus Maritime Service.
Future use of space data
The challenge for customs administrations is to optimise or reduce the necessary clearance procedures
to the minimum compatible with the country's international trade policy, while ensuring that the rules
are correctly applied with a minimum of impediments and with no increase of risk of fraud.
Digitalisation and dematerialisation of customs operations is one response to this challenge, involving
the use of complementary elements and technologies to further automate customs clearance processes.
These include electronic filing systems, a single window system, risk management, use of GNSS and EO
in combination with electronic seals and cargo tracking and tracing systems.
In the short term, authenticated GNSS can become a key enabler of further automated processes. EO
services used more widely – e.g. for supply chain risk assessment – could ensure more streamlined
clearance procedures and more effective fight against counterfeiting and illicit traffic.
USE CASES
1 The control of the movement of people across borders is generally the function of a distinct immigration service or border guard.
© iStock
Customs operations: at the heart of international trade
196RESILIENT SOCIETIES
USE CASES
Organised crime – such as trafficking and smuggling – is a transnational problem calling for transnational
solutions. With increased mobility of people, goods and capital, organised crime has greatly evolved and
now leverages advanced technologies to strengthen and further its activities, including cybercrime.
Prevention and suppression of trafficking and smuggling can benefit from
space technologies
Combating organised crime is a major challenge for the international community. Along with terrorism,
it is now considered the greatest non-military threat to internal security and international economic
stability. Although it is difficult to estimate, the overall proceeds of organised crime total around €1
trillion per year, according to French authorities.1
In a context where crime knows no national borders or sovereignty, it is essential to adopt a global
strategy to tackle it and to reinforce international collaboration, especially between law enforcement
agencies and judicial bodies. The United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
(Palermo Convention), which contains protocols against trafficking persons, the smuggling of migrants
and the trafficking of firearms, acknowledges this situation and provides a global legal framework for
such required multinational efforts.
At the global level, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the World Customs
Organization (WCO) manage the Container Control Programme (CCP) aimed at building capacity in
countries seeking to improve risk management, supply chain security and trade facilitation in seaports,
land borders and airports to prevent the cross-border movement of illicit goods. In Europe, the Global
Illicit Flows Programme (GIFP) aims at strengthening international cooperation and capacities to tackle
transnational organised crime.
Fighting efficiently against trafficking implies actions all along the supply chain, from the point of origin
to the final destination. This includes detection of illegal crop cultivation, poaching, logging and mining,
control of exit and entry points in a territory, control of transport of the cargo – including maritime
surveillance – and eventually prevention of distribution.
Agencies involved in this fight include police, environmental agencies, anti-drug agencies, navies, coast
guards, port authorities, border guards, and customs authorities.
Notable international or European actors include the International Criminal Police Organization (ICPO-
Interpol), Frontex (European Border and Coast Guard Agency), EFCA (European Fisheries Control
Agency), EMSA (European Maritime Safety Agency) and Europol, facilitating information exchanges
between Member States and carrying out criminal analysis and assessing threats. Alongside its judicial
sector counterpart, Eurojust, Europol is a keystone in Europe’s arsenal to combat transnational organised
crime.
GNSS and EO role in suppression of trafficking and smuggling
Role of GNSS
GNSS is used all along the Illicit trafficking supply chain by criminals and law enforcement agencies alike,
as standard equipment for navigation and reporting purposes (for the platform transporting the goods).
Governmental agencies, however, may be using secure governmental services such as Galileo PRS or
GPS PPS. Additionally, the cargo itself can be traced by a standard GNSS tracker, but also by additional
concealed trackers in case of suspected trafficking.
Role of Earth Observation
Earth Observation is an essential tool to identify the production sites of illegal goods (origin of the
supply chain) which are often located in remote and difficult-to-access areas. This early detection can
range from areas of illegal crop production, mining and poaching to suspicious activities on archeologic
sites.
It is also invaluable for surveillance of the maritime routes used by traffickers for detection, identification,
and tracking of suspicious targets. Comparing positions reported by the mandatory (GNSS-enabled)
VMS, AIS, or LRIT systems with EO observations allows detection of anomalies or unreported actions
(e.g., a rendezvous with a smaller boat escaping AIS regulation).
The Copernicus Security Service (CSS) is particularly relevant as it provides information that helps
the European Union to improve crisis prevention, preparedness and response, and to address security-
related challenges in the areas of Maritime surveillance, Border surveillance and Support to EU
External and Security Actions (SESA). The European Commission has entrusted the operation of these
three components of the CSS to the European Maritime Safety Agency (EMSA), the European Border
and Coast Guard Agency (Frontex) and the EU Satellite Centre (SatCen).
Future use of space data
Transnational crime exploits a variety of asymmetries created by differences in legislation, law
enforcement capabilities, economic cycles, the presence of organised crime and vulnerabilities such as
corruption. Illegal actors take advantage of the opportunities presented by these factors, creating a
tendency to exploit vulnerable geopolitical areas and weak law enforcement. Unfortunately, economic
or geopolitical instabilities and crises regularly occur, creating new vulnerabilities that criminal actors
are prompt to exploit. Reducing crime displacement is a priority requiring rapid adaptation and strong
international cooperation between agencies. Faced with such challenges, law enforcement agencies
strive to improve their early situational awareness by employing a variety of surveillance means,
including space services.
1 Source: www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/en/french-foreign-policy/security-disarmament-and-non-proliferation/fight-against-organized-criminality/
© iStock
Prevention and suppression of trafficking and smuggling: a global challenge
RESILIENT SOCIETIES197EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
USE CASES
The digitalisation of our lives and the widespread use of information and communication technologies
(ICT) have created new challenges for law enforcement and judicial authorities and have profoundly
changed the way they conduct their criminal investigations or proceedings. The European Commission
has noted in 2018 that “E-Evidence in any form is relevant in around 85% of total criminal investigations”.
Satellite information is a distinct kind of digital evidence that brings exclusive advantages, including
global access, widespread availability and seemingly irrefutable proof.
Satellite data is a new and very powerful form of scientific evidence
Digital and scientific evidence are very powerful tools to support judicial proceedings and have long been
admitted in courts. However, there are several factors to consider when using such data in legal procedures.
New technologies are inevitably ahead of the legal framework that allows them to be used as evidence,
which can be a problem at times. A recurring issue is the balance between privacy and surveillance
technologies.
Competence is also an important factor to consider. Legal practitioners, including judges, must call on
expert witnesses to explain the significance of the data as it may be unclear by itself.
Legal admissibility: The issue of admissibility means that there is a need to ensure that data presented
as evidence in court are acquired legally, free from manipulation, authentic and of the desired quality
and accuracy.
To cope with such questions, special guidelines known as the Daubert Standard1 – first developed
in the US but adopted in many countries and in international law – exist for admitting novel scientific
evidence based on expert testimony in court, including satellite products. This standard sets out
additional requirements for assessing the scientific maturity and acceptance of the proposed evidence,
compared to those applicable to physical evidence (authenticity, completeness, reliability, credibility and
proportionality).
The use of data generated by space services (GNSS, EO) as evidence in court
and other legal proceedings is not new and has become increasingly common.
In 1986. For example, the International Court of Justice (ICJ) used satellite
images in a border dispute between Burkina Faso and Mali.
These technologies are critical for rapid responses to developing crises, long-
term monitoring of adherence to post-conflict or environmental agreements
and in prosecuting violators of human rights. Moreover, during international
law disputes, such as territorial and maritime disputes, parties can use satellite-
based data in the proceedings to present support for their claims. The data
can be used both as hard material evidence and as corroborative evidence that
enhances the quality of other evidence. The use of such data is not limited
to courts within national jurisdictions, but also in international tribunals, as
illustrated in the ICJ case mentioned above.
GNSS and EO role in evidence of law violations
Role of GNSS
GNSS data are often used to investigate or document crimes and offences, for example to add location
metadata and timestamps to photo or video recordings, to reconstruct crime or accident scenes, or to
create a chronology of locations and events. However, they are less commonly used as evidence because
they do not have the intrinsic qualities required to be directly admissible in court, as discussed below.
Role of Earth Observation
EO provides insight into otherwise inaccessible (dangerous or remote) areas and enables large-scale
or historical analysis. It is also often the only tool with such capabilities and may have been used in
the discovery and investigation of the case before being used as evidence in the prosecution. High-
resolution optical images are the easiest to present in court, although other data may also be of interest.
Common benefits and challenges
EO and GNSS technologies are an independent and objective form of reporting and provide scientific
corroboration of on-the-ground reporting. In both cases, the information is stored digitally and
transmitted electronically. Space-derived data must therefore meet the standards for digital evidence
discussed above, and in particular their acquisition, custody, control, transfer, analysis and disposition
must form a proper chain of custody (CoC).
This last point is particularly important: since the processes used to extract information presented as
evidence from raw EO or GNSS data are very complex and usually beyond the competence of judges or
juries, expert witnesses must educate them during their testimony. This situation is complicated by the
lack of protocols and standardised methodologies accepted by the courts.
Satellite data are processed, filtered, enhanced and interpreted for release by people who may or may
not bring their own biases to bear.
Furthermore, the digital nature of this data makes it susceptible to
manipulation: in the case of digital images, which are a combination of 0s
and 1s, the data can be altered without the possibility of detecting forgery. In
the case of GNSS, self-spoofing examples (e.g. vessels trying to circumvent
embargoes) have also been widely reported.
Future use of space data
Despite the challenges discussed above, the use of GNSS and EO data as
evidence in legal proceedings will continue to grow, thanks to their unique
power and reach, and to the ongoing efforts of space service providers to
increase confidence in their products. GNSS authentication, pioneered by
Galileo, is just one example of such efforts.
The development of open standard methodologies and protocols, which are
currently lacking, will facilitate the acceptance of GNSS or EO data by courts
and their consideration in national and international laws and regulations. The
use of open standard products, such as those provided by Copernicus, is a
good example of such recognition in a legal framework, allowing EU Member
States, for example, to use them to automate the acceptance of claims for
agricultural subsidies and fish catches.
1 See e.g. https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/daubert_standard
© iStock
Evidence of law violations: satellites as impartial witnesses
198RESILIENT SOCIETIES
USE CASES
Election observation is a vital EU activity aiming to promote democracy, human rights and the rule of
law worldwide. It contributes to strengthening democratic institutions, increasing public confidence in
electoral processes and helping to deter fraud, intimidation and violence. It also reinforces other key EU
foreign policy objectives, in particular peacebuilding.
Working alongside the European External Action Service (EEAS), the service for Foreign Policy
Instruments (FPI) is responsible for operational expenditures in the crucial area of EU external action.
The FPI acts as a first responder to EU foreign policy needs and opportunities in several domains,
including election observation.
The European Union deploys Election Observation Missions (EOMs) to countries all around the world,
with the exception of the regions covered by the Organization for Security and Co-Operation in Europe
(OSCE). In the EU Member States, election processes are observed by the OSCE.
Election observation is a demanding task that can be facilitated by the use of
space data
International election observation is a valuable tool for improving the quality of elections. Observers help
to build public confidence in the integrity of electoral processes. Election monitoring helps to promote
and protect the civil and political rights of voters, to prevent manipulation and fraud, and to expose
such problems when they occur. When observers issue positive reports, they build confidence in the
democratic process and the legitimacy of the governments that emerge from elections.
Any election can be improved by independent observation, but in-depth monitoring is particularly useful
in countries where a significant proportion of the population lacks confidence in the electoral system,
such as post-conflict countries where groups that fought on the battlefield may have strong suspicions
about the political system and the electoral process. The same applies to countries that have held very
few elections or those adopting electoral reforms.
In such cases, election observation makes an
important contribution to peacebuilding, because
building confidence in the electoral process is a
prerequisite for peace.
Election observation by the United Nations or
other intergovernmental organisations can be
particularly useful where domestic observer
organisations do not have sufficient power or
resources to organise effective monitoring, or
where their impartiality may be questioned.
International observer missions are organised
by a wide range of actors, such as the European
Union, OSCE, the Carter Center, the African
Union, OAS and the Council of Europe.
Comprehensive observation requires an
examination of the entire pre-election period
and post-election developments, as well as what
happens on election day.
GNSS and EO role in support for elections observation
The ability of observers to reach remote locations or to cover an entire country to fulfil their mission is
often limited, intentionally or otherwise. Furthermore, access to some places may involve an element of
risk.
Role of GNSS
To ensure the safety of observation missions, Satcom-enabled GNSS trackers provide ‘track and trace’
capabilities for personnel and assets in the field, allowing a control centre to monitor their position and
stay informed of the situation. Such missions may take place in contested environments, which may
require specific capabilities in terms of resilience and trustworthiness, but only standard open GNSS
services are currently used.
Role of Earth Observation
When direct, ground-level observations are challenging or unfeasible, EO data can provide valuable
assistance. Satellite imagery is an important means of detecting the movement and number of
people, and can be used for gauging electoral participation levels or to identify anomalous patterns
(for instance, unoccupied polling stations in an otherwise well-attended election) that may indicate
disruption of the electoral process.
Future use of space data
The recent increase in political instability on several continents is evidence that sound democratic
practices are more necessary than ever.
Election observation missions can contribute to this, even though their task is made more challenging
by an unfavourable environment, which may even call into question the credibility and relevance of
their assessments.
In addition, the role of observers has been
greatly complicated by the emergence of digital
technologies in elections (e.g. voting machines,
Internet voting), which require new skills and
new monitoring tools.
In this context, it is more important than ever
to improve the quality and reach of election
observation, and the full potential of space
services can be effectively used to help meet
such challenges.
Election observation: an important tool for building peace and democracy
© EEAS
ANNEXES199EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
METHODOLOGY
Annex 1: Methodology
Methodology
The Market Report applies the EUSPA’s Market Monitoring and Forecasting Tool (MMFT). The model utilises advanced forecasting techniques applied
to a wide range of input data, assumptions, and scenarios to forecast the size of the GNSS and EO markets. The GNSS market is quantified according to
shipments, revenues and installed base of GNSS devices, while the EO market is defined by purchase of data and services. All revenues are measured
from the demand point of view, i.e., in which part of the world the data, services, and devices are purchased. This methodology attributes the size of the
EO and GNSS market to the region where, devices, data or services are sold and used.
The forecast methodology is applied to each application and depends on the availability of input data. For some applications, detailed data on the
number of devices shipped or value of the market are available, others rely on the number of devices in the installed base, while others still use the
number of potential users as a starting point, or the revenues generated in the market. Key input assumptions are collected from market reports and
studies to help inform the penetration of GNSS, the average lifetime of a devices, device prices, EO data and services sales, and more. Input assumptions
and outputs are subject to internal and external validation with industry experts to ensure emerging trends are captured as soon as they are identified.
Where possible, historical values are anchored to actual data in order to ensure a high level of accuracy. Application-level model results are cross-
checked against the most recent market research reports from independent sources before being validated through an iterative consultation process
with European and international sector experts and stakeholders. In particular, quantitative data and forecasts of GNSS devices shipments, installed
base and the deriving revenues presented throughout the Market Report are given for all applications listed in the charts of each market segment,
carefully cross-checked in order to avoid double-counting of devices. That is why it is possible that the front page of each market segment provides a
longer list of applications. In many cases, a single GNSS device contributes to a variety of applications. In the same way, quantitative data and forecasts
of EO revenues presented throughout the Market Report are given for all applications listed in the charts of each market segment, carefully cross-
checked in order to avoid overlaps and double-counting. The revenues attributed to the EO applications in the different segments are to be interpreted
as the best estimation of relative proportion between them. The authors adopted a best-effort approach to ensure achieving the best possible accuracy.
A different methodology was used to calculate EO and GNSS revenues presented on pages 13, 14 and 23, 24 respectively, compared to the rest of
the report. This methodology measures the size of the EO and GNSS industry from a supply perspective based on a bottom-up approach which quantifies
revenues attributable to EO and GNSS of more than 1 500 individual companies. The analysis presented on those pages only relates to companies for
which financial data are available (those with turnover greater than the threshold exempting small firms from financial reporting – this threshold is not
universal, so smaller companies may be included for some regions and not others). Companies are allocated to a single region based on the registered
headquarters of the company (or its ultimate parent), which indicates the regions in which the revenues deriving from EO data, GNSS equipment and
related services are generated. Changes in market share are driven by general market trends, mergers and acquisitions, and exchange rate fluctuations.
Not all companies are obliged to report their financial information, so inaccuracies in revenues for individual organisations may exist. In the case of
missing financial figures for 2021, especially for relevant players, revenues were extrapolated from available information. The authors are aware that
the accessibility of information on the companies’ revenues might differ in different world regions, potentially leading to inaccuracies and biases. In
particular, there may be vertical integration in the Chinese and Russian governments. This means that activities, which in Europe are procured by
the government from industry on market terms, are delivered internally by those governments. This implies that companies from those countries
might appear underrepresented in the analysis. The authors adopted a best-effort approach to ensure achieving the best possible accuracy and
completeness. The revenues of the companies included in the analysis are allocated to the different segments of application and the different steps of
the value chain according to the best knowledge available to the authors, which is based on official sources (e.g. companies’ annual reports) and other
secondary sources, including databases and reports and interviews with the companies of interest and industry experts. Concerning EO, data and
data processing services can be used in any market segment, making it difficult to delineate the companies to the different segments of application.
Therefore, data acquisition and distribution is not quantified per segment in this study.
Sources
The model makes use of publicly available information
and additional data and reports purchased from
private publishers. Primary sources include:
Euroconsult (EO Data & Services Market, 2022), ABI
Research; Airbus; American Farm Bureau Federation;
App Annie; appFigures; BCG; Berg Insight; BI
Intelligence; Boeing; Bombardier; Broadcom; Cisco;
Cubris; Deloitte; Digi-Capital; EU C-ITS Strategy;
EGNOS Service Provider (ESSP); Embraer; Equasis;
Eurocontrol; European GNSS Service Centre (GSC);
Eurostat; European Commission; European Securities
and Markets Authority; Farstad Shipping; Finnish VTT
Research Centre; Food and Agriculture Organisation;
FP7 and H2020 project websites; Federal
Aviation Administration; Gartner; General Aviation
Manufacturers Association (GAMA); General Aviation
News; GE Transportation Signaling; Goodyear; Google;
GPS World; Grand View Research; GSM Association;
Gunter’s Space Page; Harbor Research; Hitachi;
IBM; IDC; Infomines; Infonetics; Informa Economics
and Measure; Inside GNSS; International COSPAS-
SARSAT Programme; International Council of Marine
Industry Associations (ICOMIA); International Road
Assessment Programme (IRAP); International
Telecommunications Union (ITU); International
Maritime Organization (IMO); International Convention
for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS); International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO); Irish Health &
Safety Authority; Juniper Research; Kapsch GPS
World Receiver Survey; KPMG; London School of
Economics; Lux Research; MarketsandMarkets;
McKinsey; Ministère de l'Environnement, de l'Energie
et de la Mer; Nanosats Database; NATS Jon King blog;
Orbis; Organisation Internationale des Constructeurs
d’Automobiles (OICA); Pew Research Centre;
Proxbook; Research and Markets; Rivers of the World
Atlas; Rolls Royce; Royal Institute of Navigation;
Sensors Magazine; SESAR Joint Undertaking; Siemens;
Statista; Statistic Brain; Technavio; Thales Alenia
Space; TTG Transportation Technology; Teal Group;
The Verge; TrendForce; TNS/Google; UAVGlobal;
UCS Satellite Database; UIC International Railway
Statistics; United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD); United Nations public
information; UseGalileo; US Bureau of Labor Statistics;
US National Transportation Statistics; Vision Mobile;
VTPI; World Bank; World Economic Forum; World
Shipping Council; World Stock Exchange; Xinhua.
Disclaimer
The EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report issue 2 was carried out by the European Union Agency for the Space Programme in cooperation with
the European Commission and with the support of EY Belgium, Egis, Evenflow, FDC and LE Europe.
The present document is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either express or implied in relation to its content and/or use and the views
expressed herein do not necessarily represent the opinions or the stated policy of either EUSPA or the European Union. To the extent permitted by
the applicable law, the EUSPA shall not be liable for any damages arising from the content and use of the present document.
Any comments to improve the next issue are welcome and should be addressed to: market@euspa.europa.eu
200ANNEXES
PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS
Annex 2: Definition of GNSS performance parameters
Key GNSS performance parameters
Availability is the the percentage of time the position, navigation or timing solution can be computed by
the user. Values vary greatly according to the specific application and services used but typically range
from 95 to 99.9%. Two types of availability are considered:
Ø System availability: is what GNSS Interface Control Documents (ICDs) refer to.
Ø Overall availability: takes into account the receiver performance and the user’s environment. Values
vary greatly according to the specific use cases and services used.
Accuracy is the difference between true and computed solution (position or time). This is expressed
as the value within which a specified proportion – usually 95% – of samples would fall if measured.
This report refers to positioning accuracy using the following convention: centimetre-level: 0-10 cm;
decimetre level: 10-100 cm; metre-level: 1-10 metres.
Calibration only relates to GNSS Timing Receivers and is the process of measuring the different biases
of the GNSS signal’s propagation through the antenna cable and equipment hardware in order to
characterise and consider them when computing the timing solution.
Continuity is the ability of a system to perform its function (deliver PNT services with the required
performance levels) without interruption once the operation has started. It is usually expressed as the
risk of discontinuity and depends entirely on the timeframe of the application. A typical value is around
1*10-4 over the course of the procedure where the system is in use.
Integrity is a term used to express the ability of the system to provide warnings to users when it should
not be used. It is the probability of a user being exposed to an error larger than the alert limits without
timely warning. The way integrity is ensured and assessed, and the means of delivering integrity-related
information to users are highly application dependent. Throughout this report, the “integrity concept”
is to be understood at large, i.e., not restricted to safety-critical or civil aviation definitions but also
encompassing concepts of quality assurance/quality control as used in other applications and sectors.
Robustness relates to spoofing and jamming and how the system can cope with these issues. It is a more
qualitative than quantitative parameter that depends on the type of attack or interference the receiver is
capable of mitigating. Robustness can be improved by authentication information and services.
Authentication gives a level of assurance that the data provided by a positioning system has been
derived from real signals. Radio frequency spoofing may affect the positioning system, resulting in false
data as output of the system itself.
Time To First Fix (TTFF) is a measure of time between activation of a receiver and the availability of
a solution, including any power on self-test, acquisition of satellite signals and navigation data and
computation of the solution. It mainly depends on data that the receiver has access to before activation:
cold start (the receiver has no knowledge of the current situation and must thus systematically search
for and identify signals before processing them – a process that can take up to several minutes.), warm
start (the receiver has estimates of the current situation – typically taking tens of seconds) or hot start
(the receiver understands the current situation – typically taking a few seconds).
Other performance parameters
Power consumption is the amount of power a device uses to provide a position. The power consumption
of the positioning technology will vary depending on the available signals and data. For example, GNSS
chips will use more power when scanning to identify signals (cold start) than when computing a position.
Typical values are in the order of tens of mW (for smartphone chipsets).
Resiliency is the ability to prepare for and adapt to changing conditions and withstand and recover
rapidly from disruptions; including the ability to recover from deliberate attacks, accidents, or naturally
occurring threats or incidents. A resilient system will change its way of operations while continuing
to function under stress, while a robust (but non-resilient) system will reach a failure state at the end,
without being able to recover.
Connectivity refers to the need for a communication and/or connectivity link of an application to be
able to receive and communicate data to third parties. Connectivity relies on the integration with both
satellite and terrestrial networks, such as 5G, LEO satellites, or LPWANs.
Interoperability refers to the characteristic of a product or system, whose interfaces are completely
understood, to work with other products or systems, in either implementation or access, without any
restrictions (e.g. ability of GNSS devices to be combined with other technologies and the possibility to
merge the GNSS output with the output coming from different sources).
Traceability is the ability to relate a measurement to national or international standards using an
unbroken chain of measurements, each of which has a stated uncertainty. For Finance applications,
knowledge of the traceability of the time signal to UTC is essential to ensure regulatory compliance of
the timestamp.
The definitions given below are to explain the GNSS performance parameters as referenced throughout the report, in order to support the reader in gaining full understanding of the report content. Although
universally accepted definitions for the performance parameters do not always exist, the terminology adopted in this report is based on converging definitions by influential sources and publications.
ANNEXES201EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS
Annex 2: Definition of EO performance parameters
Key EO performance parameters
Spatial resolution relates to the level of detail that can be retrieved from a scene. In the case of a satellite
image, which consists of an array of pixels, it corresponds to the smallest feature that can be detected on
the image. A common way of characterising the spatial resolution is to use the Ground Sample Distance
(GSD) which corresponds to the distance measured on the ground between the centres of two adjacent
pixels. Thus, a spatial resolution of 1 metre means that each pixel corresponds to a 1 by 1 metre area
on the ground.
Spectral resolution refers to the ability of a sensor to differentiate electromagnetic radiation of different
wavelengths. In other words, it refers to the number and "size" of wavelength intervals that the sensor
is able to measure. The finer the spectral resolution, the narrower the wavelength range for a particular
channel or band. In remote sensing, features (e.g. water, vegetation) can be characterised by comparing
their "response" in different spectral bands.
Radiometric resolution expresses the sensitivity of the sensor, that is to say its ability to differentiate
between different magnitudes of the electromagnetic energy. The finer the radiometric resolution, the
more sensitive it is to small differences in the energy emitted or reflected by an object. The radiometric
resolution is generally expressed in bit, a resolution of 8 bit meaning that the "brightness" of the image
is measured with a scale of 28=256 nuances.
Temporal resolution relates to the time elapsed between two consecutive observations of the same
area on the ground. The higher the temporal resolution, the shorter the time between the acquisitions of
two consecutive observations of the same area. In absolute terms, the temporal resolution of a remote
sensing system corresponds to the time elapsed between two consecutive passes of the satellite over
the exact same point on the ground (generally referred to as "revisit time" or "orbit cycle"). However,
several parameters like the overlap between the swaths of adjacent passes, the agility of the satellites
and in case of a constellation, the number of satellites mean that some areas of the Earth can be re-
imaged more frequently. For a given system, the temporal resolution can therefore be better than the
revisit time of the satellite(s).
Geolocation accuracy refers to the ability of an EO remote sensing platform to assign an accurate
geographic position on the ground to the features captured in a scene. An accurate geolocation makes
easier the combination of several images (e.g. combination of a Synthetic Aperture Radar image with a
cadastral map and a vegetation map).
Spectral range refers to the wavelength range of a particular channel or band over which remote
sensing data must be collected.
Latency is the difference between the reference time of the satellite measurement and the time the
final product (e.g. optical or radar image) is made available to users (e.g. value-added service providers).
Other performance parameters
Agility corresponds to the ability of a satellite to modify its attitude and to point rapidly in any direction
in order to observe areas of interest outside its ground trace. High agility can improve the temporal
resolution compared with the revisit time of the satellite.
Swath corresponds to width of the portion of the ground that the satellite "sees" at each pass. The
larger the swath, the bigger the observed area at each pass.
Off-nadir angle corresponds to the angle at which images are acquired compared with the "nadir", i.e.,
looking straight down at the target. In practice, objects located directly below the sensor only have their
tops visible, thus making it impossible to represent the three-dimensional surface of the Earth. High
resolution images are therefore generally not collected at nadir but at an angle. A large off-nadir angle
enables a wider ground coverage at each pass and the identification of features not visible at nadir, but
it reduces the spatial resolution. For optical imagery, typical off-nadir angles are in the range of 25-30
degrees.
Sun-elevation angle corresponds to the angle of the sun above the horizon at the time an image is
collected. High elevation angles can lead to bright spots on the imagery while low elevation angles lead
to darker images and longer shadows. The most appropriate angle depends on the type of application:
a high sun elevation is appropriate for spectral analysis since the objects to be observed are well
illuminated while a lower elevation angle is better suited to interpretation of surface morphology (e.g.
the projected shadows can enable a better image interpretation).
The definitions given below are to explain the EO performance parameters as referenced throughout the report in order to support the reader in gaining full understanding of the report content. Although
universally accepted definitions for the performance parameters do not always exist, the terminology adopted in this report is based on converging definitions by influential sources and publications.
202ANNEXES
APPLICATION DESCRIPTIONS
Annex 3: List of applications
The applications for each market segment are listed below and accompanied with a definition, explaining the use of EO, GNSS or both. The list of segments follows the order of the report.
LEGEND: EO application / GNSS application / Synergetic application (combined use of EO and GNSS)
AGRICULTURE
ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING
Carbon capture & content assessment: The monitoring of agricultural vegetation and grassland cover
through EO can help inform carbon sink capacity of different terrains. EO can also be used to monitor the
maintenance of agricultural practices which pertain to CO2 sequestration.
Environmental impact monitoring: EO can be used to monitor greenhouse gas emissions associated
with agricultural activities; evaluate the impact of fertilisation on the environment; explore the potential of
carbon sequestration in agricultural land cover; and assess the level of biodiversity present in agricultural
lands.
NATURAL RESOURCES MONITORING
Biomass monitoring: The use of various optical measurements, including radar measurements in-situ
sensors, enables EO and GNSS to monitor the biomass present in a region. This can help in understanding
the capacity for CO 2 absorption of a given ecosystem or potentials for biomass energy production.
Crop yield forecasting: EO facilitates remote-monitoring and forecasting of harvest potentials, whilst
GNSS allows in-situ positioning information of field sensors to feed forecast information.
Soil condition monitoring: EO enables monitoring of soil condition and moisture levels. GNSS positioning
helps to identify the exact position of the soil samples sent to laboratories. Soil condition monitoring is
important for understanding the growth potential and health status of plants.
Vegetation monitoring: EO enables the monitoring of vegetation coverage and health (through the
generation of various indices such as NDVI). This information can be used to understand land cover
statistics and provide inputs for efficient farm management practices.
OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT
Asset monitoring: GNSS provides insightful telematics data from tractors and other farm vehicles/assets
to help increase efficiency when conducting operations, monitor workforce activity and reduce costs.
Automatic steering: Automatic steering completely takes over steering of the farm equipment from the
driver allowing the operator to engage in core agricultural tasks.
CAP monitoring: The enforcement of certain agricultural practices mandated by the Common Agricultural
Policy, such as the maintenance of permanent grassland or the diversification of crop species, can all be
monitored and enforced using EO data or geotagged photos using GNSS.
Farm machinery guidance: GNSS positioning is used to assist drivers of farm machinery in following
the optimal path when conducting activities such as variable rate application, thus minimising risks of
overlaps.
Farm management systems: Both EO and GNSS can inform part of an overall farm management
system, through various types of practical, operational and financial data aimed to improve the holistic
management of a farm.
Field definition: Both EO and GNSS allow for the precise measurement and definition of field boundaries.
Livestock wearables: Animals can be fitted with devices which use GNSS to track and monitor their
activity and health status.
Pastureland management: EO can monitor the growth and maintenance of grasslands. Mowing and
grazing activities on grassland can be detected and verified using EO.
Precision irrigation: Similar to variable rate application, precision irrigation combines GNSS positioning
with EO information to distribute the appropriate amount of water for irrigating crops.
Variable rate application: Variable rate application combines GNSS positioning with EO information
to distribute varying amounts of agrichemicals and seeds across a given area. Discrepancies in
performance and areas of lower crop yields can be identified and specifically targeted with extra input
treatments (fertilisers, pesticides) or seeds by farmers. This can help improve overall performance and
reduce agricultural input usage.
WEATHER SERVICES FOR AGRICULTURE
Climate services for agriculture: Long term forecasting and monitoring of climate variables relevant
to agriculture using remotely sensed data. Air quality and land temperature can be understood through
the use of EO, which in turn can help in understanding how our climate could affect future harvests and
yields.
Weather forecasting for agriculture: Short term weather forecasting, air quality, land temperature and
cloud cover can all be understood using EO, which in turn can help form weather forecasts relevant to
precise locations. This allows farmers to plan operations such as irrigation or fertiliser scheduling.
ANNEXES203EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
APPLICATION DESCRIPTIONS
Annex 3: List of applications
AVIATION AND DRONES
COMMUNICATIONS
ATM system timing: The ground systems used by air traffic control are increasingly connected. The
systems rely on precise and high integrity timing for synchronisation of logs, communication and traffic
handover at system level - all of which are dependent on GNSS derived timing.
ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING
Aircraft emission measurement and monitoring: Enables monitoring of trace gas composition of the
Earth’s atmosphere at different altitudes to understand more accurately the impact Aviation has on the
environment at those different altitudes.
Particulate matter monitoring: Enables air traffic services to monitor particulates in airspace, enabling
them to provide avoidance instructions (e.g. to avoid volcanic ash clouds) and allowing improved
planning of routes and flight efficiency.
NAVIGATION
Drone navigation (uncertified): An uncertified navigation tools capable of PVT and other capabilities
related to drone navigation providing horizontal/vertical accuracy, integrity (integrity risk, time to alert
and alert limits), continuity and availability for different phases of flight and environments.
Performance Based Navigation (PBN): An umbrella term for navigation based on a specific standard.
For simplicity, this is categorised as:
• Area Navigation: A fundamental requirement for IFR aircraft and certified category drones to be able
to navigate along routes with a required accuracy. GNSS is a core capability that enables them to meet
the requirements of PBN within the en-route and terminal phases of flight.
• Approach Navigation: The approach phase of flight is a critical phase where high performance is
needed from GNSS. SBAS and GBAS are two solutions that are deployed, providing IFR aircraft and
certified category drones with the capability to land in low visibility conditions down to 200 ft. These
performances are expected to be extended by incorporating Galileo and dual frequencies.
• Low Level Routing: An area navigation capability specified initially for helicopter operations but
supporting light General Aviation and potentially drones in the future. The ceiling of the routes is low
level (<4 000’) and enables helicopters to transition busy TMA or areas of high terrain safety.
Performance Based Navigation (PBN) for drones: An umbrella term for navigation based on a specific
and certified standard. An equivalent of PBN for manned aviation.
VFR complement: Use of uncertified GNSS receivers as a navigation complement to VFR piloted
operations. This includes moving map displays on portable devices.
OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT
Aircraft maintenance and operations optimisation: Identifies areas where aircraft have flown through
large areas of particulate matter and in turn require early or more maintenance actions helping airlines
and manufacturers save costs. When combined with innovative digital and satellite-based solutions,
it also supports new tools and traffic optimisation mechanisms for multimodal access, passenger and
freight flows into and out of the airport, as well as between airports, facilitating improved airport access
and reducing traffic from/to the city or other key transport nodes.
Airport capacity and safety: GNSS is a valuable asset to support Advanced-Surface Movement
Guidance and Control System (A-SMGCS) surveillance and safety support services as well as helping
airport managers to maintain high quality and complete knowledge of their airport assets.
Drone operations planning: Includes the use of EO data to understand the environment close to planned
flight trajectory and consequently to support ground risk assessment. EO data supports inclusion of
terrain/surface model into route planning in order to apply ground clearance. EO data can also support
operators in identifying alternative landing site. GNSS (SBAS) enables precise route planning and
increased integrity of positioning signal thus ensuring that positioning and navigation performance is
known and acceptable.
Monitoring terrain obstacles: EO assists airport operators in monitoring and managing potential threats
to aviation safety from changes to airport surroundings and helping to secure safe flight take-off and
landing. Outside of airport’s protected areas, EO is also capable to provide high accuracy terrain models
supporting airspace users operating close to the ground.
U-space services: The precise positioning and integrity enabled by EGNOS can support U-space services
serving both manned and unmanned airspace users. Such services include network identification, geo-
awareness or conformance monitoring. It is important to note that network identification only applies to
drones. EO can support geo-awareness (post-processing).
SURVEILLANCE
Electronic Conspicuity (certified): Provides self-reporting of position from an aircraft or drone to other
aviation actors providing a means to learn about position and speed vectors. The information from this
is derived from GNSS and covers numerous non-certified solutions used for situational awareness of
the operator.
Electronic Conspicuity (uncertified): Provides self-reporting of position from an aircraft or drone to
other aviation actors providing means to learn about position and speed vectors. The information is
derived from GNSS and covers numerous certified solution used mostly for Air Traffic Management.
GADSS: The Global Aeronautical Distress and Safety System is a concept developed by ICAO which
enhances the effectiveness and alerting of search and rescue services in the event of an aviation
tragedy. It ensures that the aircraft is tracked and that the lasted known GNSS derived position is always
recorded, maintaining an up-to-date record of aircraft progress. GADSS has three components: Aircraft
Tracking; Autonomous Distress Tracking; and Post Flight Localization and Recovery. Aircraft Tracking
is enabled through the on-board GNSS equipment (either the PBN or Electronic Conspicuity device),
whilst the other components are provided by Emergency Locator Transmitters which are covered in the
Emergency Management and Humanitarian Aid segment.
Infrastructure timing: Different solutions, such as radars, are used by air traffic services to track aircrafts
and provide services to facilitate conflict free traffic flows. All systems in use today rely on GNSS for
timing, and often synchronisation as well, for example in Wide Area Multilateration systems that use
multiple synchronised receivers to calculate where an aircraft is.
WEATHER SERVICES
Hazardous weather identification: EO is used to identify and monitor hazardous weather conditions
such as storms, enabling aircraft and air traffic management to detect and avoid these weather
phenomena earlier. This leads to a reduction in the number of safety incidents and increased flight
efficiency.
204ANNEXES
APPLICATION DESCRIPTIONS
Annex 3: List of applications
CLIMATE, ENVIRONMENT, AND BIODIVERSITY
BIODIVERSITY, ECOSYSTEMS AND NATURAL CAPITAL
Animal tracking for biodiversity purposes: GNSS-beacons are used to geo locate animals for the
purposes of monitoring migrations, habitats, and behaviours.
Ecosystems monitoring: Includes coastal, snow and ice, terrestrial and water ecosystems. For coastal
ecosystems monitoring, EO provides information on multiple parameters, such as coastal wetland
loss, land-use cover and change, wetland mapping, coastal geomorphology, water optical properties,
waterbody nutrients (chlorophyll-a), littoral and subtidal habitat, erosion and sedimentation mapping,
long time series of ocean colour products including uncertainties estimates or health issues such as
algal bloom detection. For snow and ice ecosystems monitoring, EO provides data on snow and ice
cover (multispectral and thermal, and to a lesser extent microwave), mapping the structural glaciology
of big and small glaciers, mapping of glacier change, conducting glacier inventories, mapping glacier
thinning, measuring thinning ice shelves, glacier velocity, mapping glacier landforms and measuring
the ice-sheet bed. For terrestrial ecosystems monitoring, EO data provides information on plant species
which respond differently to light emitted by the sun or by various artificial energy sources, with specific
reflection characteristics in the electromagnetic spectrum. This makes EO data of adequate spectral and
spatial resolution and a useful tool to distinguish different species. Other relevant data derived from EO
relate to air/water quality completing the information for the status/forecasting of the ecosystem. With
regards to water ecosystems monitoring, EO provides information on multiple parameters needed to
assess the conditions and the equilibrium in water ecosystems, such as: bio-geochemical analyses and
forecasts for global and regional seas, topography, bathymetry, ocean colour, sea-surface temperature,
ocean currents, fish quantification, and others.
CLIMATE SERVICES
Climate change mitigation and adaptation: Various types of EO data can be used to aid formation of
short and long-term climate change mitigation and adaptation strategies.
Climate monitoring and forecasting: Many types of EO data can be used in climate monitoring and
forecasting. Air quality, land temperature, cloud cover and several other parameters relevant for the
climate can all be understood with EO data, which in turn can be built into relevant models and contribute
to climate forecasting.
EO-based climate modelling: Many types of EO data, despite being unavailable for a long period, is
used as an input into climate modelling. This results in computer simulated dynamic projections of the
Earth’s systems behaviour used for various purposes.
GNSS-based climate modelling: GNSS supports a range of geodetic applications that measure
properties of the Earth (magnetic field, atmosphere) with direct impact on the Earth's climate.
ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING
Environmental auditing: EO data aids in the assessment of the impact of human activity across four
different environments: atmosphere, coasts, land, and water and oceans. For atmosphere, multiple EO
satellites and sensors are dedicated to monitoring atmospheric conditions, including air quality and
the presence of greenhouse gases (GHG) emissions, enabling the provision of short- and long-term
forecasting. For coastal environment, relevant EO data can be acquired relating to wetland loss, land-
use cover and change, wetland mapping, coastal geomorphology, water optical properties, waterbody
nutrients (chlorophyll-a), littoral and subtidal habitat. With regards to land, relevant parameters range
from land-use cover and change, vegetation, biomass, and soil monitoring, to the monitoring of human
impact, such as waste, constructions, and other infrastructure. The relevant parameters for water and
ocean environment which can be acquired through EO include temperature, transparency/turbidity,
water depth, tides, currents, and to an extent, flora and fauna. The data also supports the monitoring of
infrastructure and other traces of human activities, including waste.
Environmental impact assessment and ESG: EO plays a vital role in conducting impact studies
and implementing ESG policies across four distinct environments. For the atmosphere, EO satellites and
sensors are deployed to monitor atmospheric conditions, encompassing air quality and greenhouse gas
emissions, facilitating both short- and long-term forecasting. Along coastlines, EO data provides insights
into wetland loss, land-use changes, wetland mapping, coastal geomorphology, and water properties,
including chlorophyll-a levels and littoral and subtidal habitats. On land, EO applications extend to land-
use changes, vegetation, biomass, soil monitoring, and the assessment of human impacts like waste
disposal, construction, and infrastructure development. In water and ocean environments, EO data
captures parameters such as temperature, transparency, water depth, tides, and currents, while also
offering insights into flora, fauna, and human activities, including the monitoring of infrastructure and
waste.
Environmental resources management: The use of EO satellites and data enables effective
environmental resource management in four environments. Firstly, for the atmosphere, multiple EO
satellites and sensors monitor air quality and greenhouse gas emissions, providing both short and
long-term forecasting capabilities. Secondly, along the coasts, EO satellites track coastal wetland loss,
land-use changes, wetland mapping, coastal geomorphology, water properties, and nutrient levels,
aiding in erosion and sedimentation mapping, and compliance monitoring for water quality. On land, EO
applications encompass land-use changes, vegetation, biomass, soil monitoring, and the assessment
of human impacts like construction and waste. Lastly, in water and oceans, EO data measures various
parameters to assess the impacts of human and natural activities on aquatic environments, including
temperature, transparency, water depth, tides, currents, flora, fauna, and human activities such as waste
disposal.
ANNEXES205EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
APPLICATION DESCRIPTIONS
Annex 3: List of applications
CONSUMER SOLUTIONS, TOURISM & HEALTH
CORPORATE
Location-based billing: Payment processing based on location or activity duration for public transport,
gyms, theme parks, parking.
Geo-advertising: Consumer preferences are combined with positioning data to provide personalised
offers to potential customers. EO represents an additional layer of geospatial information contributing
to better audience targeting.
Mapping & GIS: Smartphones enable users to become map creators as a result of the democratisation
of digital mapping. Mapping services comprise all consumer applications that draw on EO information
for map features, which includes location or navigational services, including navigation, tracking and
local search & discovery applications.
Workforce management: Aims to manage employees working outside the company premises and to
improve operational efficiency.
HEALTH & LIFESTYLE
Air quality monitoring: EO enables air quality applications which measure the presence of harmful
substances and particulate matter in the air (e.g. sulphur dioxide and PM 2.5). Measurements of air
quality are used to inform analytics, such as air quality indexes, and to provide recommendations to
users (e.g. to stay indoors and keep windows closed if air quality is very poor).
Games: GNSS enables a wide range of location-based games on smartphones and tablets. Various
uses are associated with EO including backdrop images for a game or gamification of EO crowdsourced
in-situ information.
Geo-tagging: adding geographical metadata to online content with the purpose of identifying the
physical location of where the content was posted from.
mHealth: In combination with other technologies, GNSS enables a vast array of applications from
patient monitoring to guidance systems for vulnerable groups (people with reduced mobility, visual
impairment and seniors).
Safety and emergency: GNSS, in combination with network-based methods, provides accurate
emergency caller location.
Social networks: Friend locators embedded in social networks use GNSS to facilitate keeping in touch
and sharing travel information.
Sport, fitness and wellness incl. specialist support tracking: GNSS enables monitoring of users’
performance through a variety of fitness applications. It records data such as real-time distance, speed/
pace, location, elevation, travelled distance, and step counters to monitor users’ performance. Speed and
elevation charts are provided (including running, biking, hiking, swimming, etc.). A growing use of EO
information is embedded in outdoor apps to provide information on snow coverage and depth, forest
elevations, etc.
UV monitoring: EO data is used in consumer UV monitoring applications to provide UV exposure
measurements for particular geolocations and to inform analytics about safe levels of UV exposure. This
allows them to make recommendations for user behaviour (e.g. recommendations to remain indoors
when the UV index is very high).
Tourism fruition: GNSS data can be used to enhance navigational capacities for tourists, including
in reaching destinations and exploring the destination areas, as well as providing information on the
destinations, such as restaurants, hospitals, ATMs, banks, petrol stations, etc.
NAVIGATION & TRACKING
Navigation for smartphone users: Route planning and turn-by-turn instructions enabled by GNSS for
both pedestrian and road users through a smartphone.
Personal & asset tracking: GNSS facilitates innovative tracking solutions, including the deployment of
local geofences that trigger an alarm when users leave a specific perimeter.
Visually impaired support: solutions providing turn-by-turn instructions based on GNSS positioning
that help visually-impaired people get around more easily.
ROBOTICS
Consumer robotics: GNSS signals are used along with other sensors integrated into consumer electronics
for localisation and navigation purposes. For example, for gardening robots, delivery robots, security and
surveillance robots, personal assistant robots, painting robots, and automated guided vehicle/logistics.
Enhanced human: Human enhancement refers to methods for altering the human body to enhance
mental or physical performance. The most developed examples are untethered mixed reality devices: in
the future, GNSS position could be combined with optical feedback and 3D mapping to give users full
situational awareness and the most accurate navigation.
206ANNEXES
APPLICATION DESCRIPTIONS
Annex 3: List of applications
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT & HUMANITARIAN AID
HUMANITARIAN AID
NGO’s asset management: Through smartphones or other devices, GNSS functionalities can be helpful
for NGOs in managing and tracking resources, including real-time personnel and asset tracking, route
optimisation particularly for disaster relief or healthcare delivery missions, data collection and effective
resource allocation for areas of need.
Welcome applications to people in need of humanitarian aid: GNSS provides accurate location
information that can be accessed through smartphones or other mobile devices for recipients and aid
distribution points and improves the efficiency and effectiveness of humanitarian efforts. The location
information can improve coordination, speed up the delivery of relief supplies to those in need, and
ensure the safety of the personnel involved.
Health and medicine response and coordination: EO data can be used to monitor the spread of
diseases and the environmental risk factors associated with certain diseases, thus, helping with public
health mitigation measures. GNSS, meanwhile, can be used to locate and navigate relief efforts and help
patients transport, as well as track the movement of healthcare supplies, especially as the data is easily
accessible from smartphones or other mobile devices.
Anticipatory humanitarian action: Anticipatory action is commonly defined as acting ahead of
predicted hazards to prevent or reduce acute humanitarian impacts before they fully unfold.
Management of refugee camps: Comprises applications where EO data is used for planning of
camp layouts, and for the distribution of resources, e.g. wells and medicine, by displaying settlement
concentrations and estimating population in different areas of a camp.
Population displacement monitoring: Monitoring of displacement patterns due to conflict or disaster
aimed at, for example, planning humanitarian responses. EO data can be used to monitor migration
routes, as well as for the identification of temporary dwelling structures.
PREVENTION AND MITIGATION
Impact exposure analysis and proactive mitigation measure: EO data can assist in preparing for
potential disasters by helping identify and monitor natural hazards, such as floods, wildfires, earthquakes
and hurricanes, and map high-risk areas that may require special attention in disaster planning.
PREPAREDNESS
Early warning emergency applications: GNSS and EO technologies perform the systematic monitoring
and alerting of various environmental hazards. This includes drought monitoring, early-warning
surveillance of forest fires, landslides and terrain deformation monitoring, earthquake and tsunami
monitoring, floods monitoring, storm surge monitoring, and volcanic activity monitoring. Leveraging
GNSS and EO technologies enables real-time data collection, analysis, and timely dissemination of
alerts, enhancing the capacity for early detection, preparedness, and effective response to mitigate the
impact of natural disasters and emergencies.
Early-warning surveillance of forest fires: EO thermal imaging can detect the heat signatures
associated with active fires, as well as smoke and aerosols that may appear. As an early warning
system, EO can provide a risk assessment and vulnerability mapping of forest fires by assessing land
cover, vegetation types, and proximity to urban areas.
Hazards monitoring: Hazards monitoring, facilitated by GNSS and EO technologies, encompasses the
systematic observation and analysis of various environmental phenomena. This includes the monitoring
of landslides and terrain deformation, locust swarms, drought monitoring, earthquake and tsunami
occurrences, floods, storm surges, vector-borne diseases, volcanic activity monitoring, and early-
warning surveillance of forest fires. Utilising GNSS and EO technologies enables the real-time tracking,
assessment, and early detection of these hazards, contributing to enhanced disaster preparedness, risk
mitigation, and timely response efforts.
Landslides and terrain deformation monitoring: EO data can be used to detect changes in the
Earth's surface that may indicate potential landslides and monitor ground displacement over time
(in conjunction with similar applications in Infrastructure or Rail that are more specifically focused on
the infrastructures themselves). GNSS can provide real-time data on ground movement, allowing for
an early warning system and a rapid response to landslide threats.
Earthquake and tsunami monitoring: EO satellites can detect and monitor surface deformations
caused by tectonic activities, including land and coastal changes. GNSS can provide early warning
signals from ground motion or sea-level changes.
Drought monitoring: In parallel to soil condition and vegetation monitoring applications used in
Agriculture (that are more specifically focused on plant health), EO can also provide data to assess
and manage drought conditions, including monitoring vegetation health, soil moisture, rainfall and
water bodies and weather forecasts.
Volcanic activity monitoring: EO can provide thermal imaging to monitor the movement and
temperature of lava flows and volcanic gasses and ash clouds. GNSS technology can be used for
ground deformation monitoring and eruption early warning systems.
Floods monitoring: EO and GNSS can provide critical data for flood prediction, early warning, and
response efforts. EO can provide flood extent mapping and damage assessment, as well as weather
forecasts and water bodies and coastal monitoring, while GNSS can provide real-time water-level
tracking.
Storm surge monitoring: EO satellites can track the formation, movement, and intensity of storms,
as well as changes in ocean temperature and levels, to mitigate storm surge events.
Monitoring of vector-borne diseases: EO can provide environmental data monitoring temperature,
humidity, precipitation, vegetation cover and other factors that may influence the spread of vector-
borne diseases.
Monitoring of locust swarms: EO satellites can detect the presence of locust swarms and track
changes in vegetation cover, as well as monitor environmental conditions that influence movement
and breeding patterns. GNSS can provide real-time swarm tracking.
RESPONSE
Crisis area assessment: EO data can provide damage assessment and monitor changes in land and
vegetation cover. Simultaneously, GNSS can provide real-time tracking of affected populations and relief
supplies and personnel.
Operational wildfires modelling: EO data equipped with thermal imaging can be used to model fire
spread, as well as provide assessment of the flammability of vegetation and potential hotspots.
ANNEXES207EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
APPLICATION DESCRIPTIONS
Annex 3: List of applications
SEARCH AND RESCUE
SAR operations - at sea: Ship and person-registered beacons, i.e., Emergency Position Indicating
Radio Beacons (EPIRBs) and Personal Locator Beacons (PLBs), transmit, once activated, the necessary
information for rescue to authorities via COSPAS / SARSAT payloads carried by GNSS satellites. The
AIS-SART (Search and Rescue Transmitter) and AIS-MOB (Man Overboard) beacons not only transmit
the position of the person in distress but also share this location through the Automatic Identification
System (AIS) with nearby vessels, by pinpointing an AIS distress signal onto the nearby vessel’s ECDIS
(Electronic Chart Display Information System).
SAR operations - aviation: Aircraft should be equipped with Emergency Locator Transmitters (ELTs)
or a PLB that helps Search and Rescue operations in the event of an incident. In line with requirements
in ICAO Annex 10 (and standards set in ICAO Annex 6) as well as the implementation of the Global
Aeronautical Distress and Safety System (GADSS), many ELTs utilise GNSS to report their position
when triggered.
SAR operations - land: Climbers and hikers are advised to equip themselves with a PLB in case they
find themselves in distress.
Situational awareness supporting SAR: EO services can assist Maritime and Joint Rescue Coordination
Centres (RCC) in a wide range of activities at sea, including support to SAR operations and exercises.
EO information, combined with maritime data and external sources, can provide a better understanding
and improved monitoring of activities at sea (including detection of ships in distress, SAR response
support, etc.).
POST-EVENT RECOVERY
Post-crisis damage assessment and building inspection: EO data can be used to map the extent of the
damage, including to infrastructures, while GNSS can provide accurate locations of damaged buildings
and enable field teams to navigate the impacted areas for inspection.
Restoration of supply chain and infrastructure services: EO data can provide damage assessment to
critical infrastructures and transportation networks, including vegetation and land cover, while GNSS
enables precise location tracking and mapping of infrastructure damage and repair efforts, in addition to
assisting in finding optimal routes for the transportation of goods and resources.
ENERGY AND RAW MATERIALS
ENERGY NETWORK FIDELITY
Energy Network conditions monitoring: The situational awareness and monitoring capabilities of EO
contribute through application such as monitoring the structural integrity of assets including towers,
poles, wind plants and solar plants, monitoring land subsidence around energy infrastructure such
as pipeline and plants, assessment of vegetation encroachments, and allowing for asset condition
management damages, degradation, corrosion, etc.
Phasor Measurement Units (PMU): GNSS provides accurate timing and synchronisation for PMUs,
which are deployed across remote locations of the power network (nodes), improving the reliability of
power systems.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT MONITORING
Environmental impact assessment of energy and raw materials: EO can support the mitigation of
energy/mining effects of the environment through continuous monitoring of relevant environmental
characteristics and through the capacity of EO to detect changes. Relevant products and services include
coastal ecosystems monitoring, water quality monitoring, air quality monitoring, erosion monitoring,
pollution monitoring, vegetation monitoring, etc. In some cases, EO-based products could also include
the production of environmental impact assessment "certificate".
MARKET INTELLIGENCE
Supply chain insights: EO data support market analysts, traders, investors, energy operators and
regulators, governments, international banking institutions and ultimately, citizens, to better understand
the new energy dynamics shifting under the pressure of climate change. AI and advanced analytics are
applied to EO for applications such as reservoir monitoring, heavy oil production mapping, underground
gas storage, sophisticated methane-detection technologies, etc.
RAW MATERIALS
Illegal mining monitoring: Due to its capacity to detect landscape changes through the analysis of
satellite imagery, EO can support the detection and monitoring of the evolution of illegal mining activities
(including in remote areas).
Mineral exploration, site planning/monitoring: EO and GNSS can provide a large variety of products
and information supporting the identification of the most suitable areas for the exploitation of mineral
resources. Products and information include geological evaluation, topography mapping, etc.
Mining vehicle management and control: Augmented GNSS solutions enable the accurate guidance
of heavy mining machinery.
208ANNEXES
APPLICATION DESCRIPTIONS
Annex 3: List of applications
RENEWABLE ENERGY
Renewable energy assessment potential and forecast: Prior to the selection of a power plant site, EO
can contribute to the assessment of the potential of a given area based on the analysis of historical data
for example, wind, solar irradiation, ocean currents, ocean temperature (e.g. for OTEC or SWAC) and
snow cover. During the exploitation phase, EO can help calculating daily production estimates based on
plant characteristics coupled with relevant forecasts. This includes, for instance, solar plant production
estimates based on solar irradiation forecasts or hydropower production estimates based on snow cover
smelting.
Renewable energy plant design optimisation: EO can help optimising the design of renewable
energy power plants (e.g. optimisation of the positioning of solar panels, onshore and offshore wind
turbines, etc.). Relevant EO-based products include terrain elevation models, solar irradiance, wind
speed, precipitation and climate conditions.
Renewable energy site selection, planning and monitoring: Earth Observation can provide a large
variety of products and information supporting the identification of the most suitable areas for the
exploitation of renewable energy sources. These products and information include, for instance, data on
relevant environmental parameters influencing the production of energy, data on the status of the power
plants, geological evaluation, topography mapping, etc. GNSS can enable geomatics applications such
as mine and construction surveying, mapping and GIS, photogrammetry, laser scanning and remote
sensing, as well as route planning and augmented reality visualisation. The GNSS devices that are used
for those applications include high-accuracy GNSS receivers (geodetic-grade smart antennas, all-in-one
integrated mapping/GIS devices or infrastructure/CORS) and embedded chipsets. On the other hand, a
number of CORS networks operate receivers that are actually powered by renewable energy sources
(e.g. solar panels or wind turbines), so the utilization of GNSS for renewable energy operations brings
mutual benefits.
Risk assessment for renewable energy assets: Energy assets are exposed to a variety of natural
risks which can put at danger the people working on site, damage equipment or negatively impact
production. EO can contribute to the assessment of the level of risk in order to prevent/mitigate the
effects of adverse events on the exploitation of energy (including the protection of workers maintaining
offshore wind platforms for instance). Relevant EO-based products and services include the monitoring
of dangerous sub-surface currents, iceberg detection and tracking, etc.
FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE
AQUACULTURE
Aquaculture operations optimisation: Throughout the operational phase of the aquaculture plants, EO
can provide water quality monitoring notably on harmful algae blooms (HABs), as well as assessment
of fish farming environmental impacts and data for modelling of species invasion. Combined in models,
such data can provide periodical estimation to aquafarmers about estimated growth and health of the
stock. GNSS plays a role when the operation of offshore farms is carried out by fully automated vessels
which rely on accurate positioning and navigation, or in the upcoming use of GNSS for the localisation
of networks of buoys.
Aquaculture site selection: Considering relevant parameters, EO data and forecasting can help select
the aquaculture location and type in both the nearshore and offshore environment.
FISHERIES
Catch Optimisation: EO data contributes to habitat mapping for fish species. Combined with weather
data and data on other relevant parameters (e.g., biogeochemical analyses and forecasts for global and
regional seas, topography, bathymetry, ocean colour, sea-surface temperature and ocean currents),
the catch optimisation application provides relevant information which allows for the selection of the
optimal timing, location, and means for fishing activities.
Fish stock detection and modelling: EO data contributes to biogeochemical analyses and forecasts for
global and regional seas, topography, bathymetry, ocean colour, sea-surface temperature and ocean
currents, which are key inputs for numerical modelling of fish stock and detection of fish shoals.
Fishing aggregating devices: GNSS-enabled buoys that assist fishermen both in locating their fishing
nets and equipment as well as the identification and location of fish stock.
Fishing vessels navigation: Using GNSS-enabled navigation devices, fishing vessels can accurately and
safely navigate their fishing waters as well as navigate towards their equipment such as fishing cages,
buoys or fish lines.
Fish provenance and ecolabelling: GNSS-enabled data from vessels can be used to monitor the
location and intensity of fishing effort. This can form an independent and reliable source of data for fish
provenance certification and ecolabelling.
Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU) control: Satellite data has surveillance capabilities
for monitoring IUU fishing activities and can contribute to the identification of perpetrators. The data
concerned is both EO (optical and radar) and GNSS (providing identification of the vessels, including
through positioning systems such as AIS and VMS). With AIS and VMS being mandatory depending on
the vessel size (i.e., 15 m for AIS, 12 m for VMS), the GNSS receiver in these applications is different to
the receiver used for general navigation.
ANNEXES209EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
APPLICATION DESCRIPTIONS
Annex 3: List of applications
FORESTRY
ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING
Biomass monitoring: EO and GNSS enable the monitoring of the biomass present in a forest using
various optical measurements, radar measurements and in-situ sensors. This can help in understanding
the capacity for CO2 absorption of a given forest or potentials for biomass energy production.
Deforestation/degradation monitoring: EO helps in remotely detecting forest degradation and/or
deforestation. Optical and radar data can be used to measure forest vegetation intensity (through the
generation of various indices such as NDVI), forest canopy cover and land use changes associated with
deforestation/degradation.
FOREST RESOURCES MONITORING
Forest inventory monitoring: EO and GNSS enable the monitoring of the timber inventories using
various optical measurements, radar measurements and in-situ sensors.
Forest vegetation health monitoring: The health of forest vegetation can be monitored and managed
using EO. Optical and radar data can be used to measure forest vegetation intensity (through the
generation of various indices such as NDVI) to infer the health of trees and forest vegetation. Meanwhile,
GNSS technology can be used to monitor parameters related to forest vegetation health, such as in
mapping forest cover or measuring tree height.
Illegal logging monitoring: EO can help in the identification of illegal logging. By using optical and radar
data to monitor land use changes and measure forest vegetation cover, illegal destruction of forests can
be detected and monitored.
OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT
Automatic steering: Automatic steering completely takes over steering of the forestry machinery from
the driver allowing the operator to engage in core forestry tasks.
Forest asset management: GNSS provides insightful telematics data from forestry assets to help
increase traceability/efficiency, monitor workforces and reduce costs.
Forest certification: EO can help in the verification and certification of forestry management and
production activities.
Forest machinery guidance: GNSS positioning can assist drivers of forest machinery in following the
optimal path when conducting activities, thus minimising risks of overlaps.
INFRASTRUCTURE
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT MONITORING
Environmental impact assessment of infrastructure: EO can support the analysis of the impact of
existing infrastructures (including during the construction phase) on the environment and ecosystem
in their surroundings. Relevant EO-based products and services include pollution monitoring (air,
water, soil), vegetation and biodiversity monitoring, etc. This application focuses on the infrastructures
themselves in contrast to similar applications in Climate, Environment and Biodiversity that are more
focused on natural or geologic changes.
INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRUCTION AND MONITORING
Construction monitoring: Thanks to its capacity to detect surface changes, EO can support the
monitoring of ground deformations in the vicinity of construction sites as well as the monitoring, in near-
real-time, of the progress achieved anywhere on the construction site. GNSS is an ultimate supplier of
positioning and orientation data for heavy machinery (graders, dozers, excavators, compactors), which
can be used for either semi-automatic (GNSS serves as a guide to the operator) or fully automatic
operations (GNSS data is directly fused into the machine hydraulic control). For the needs of BIM, GNSS
can feed the model with high-accuracy positioning data of all relevant construction assets.
Monitoring of impact of human activities on infrastructure: EO enables the monitoring of the impact
on buildings and infrastructure of land subsidence caused by a variety of human activities (e.g. aquifer
overexploitation in urban areas).
Official Development Assistance (ODA) support monitoring: EO can be used to validate that Official
Development Assistance (ODA) support (i.e., investment in different development projects) is utilised as
planned. This is often directly informing the further release of funds from a donor country to a receiving
one.
Pipeline monitoring: EO can contribute to the monitoring of pipelines through the provision of ground
deformation information across pipeline networks as well as through the provision of information related
to vegetation encroachment or third party interference. For above-ground pipelines, GNSS provides
methods for stability monitoring similar to post-construction operations, while for underground assets
it may feed high-accuracy positioning data into ground-penetration radars (GPRs) to map and detect
leakages and other faults.
Post-construction monitoring: Critical infrastructure such as dams, bridges, factories, etc., can be
damaged in case of Earth's surface deformation. EO offers solutions for the monitoring of infrastructure
stability and for the provision of situation awareness as it can accurately monitor land deformation and
to detect minor changes (e.g. building subsidence). The stability of critical infrastructure is monitored
also via high-precision GNSS methods, e.g., by post-processing of static relative GNSS observations at
field control points (established directly into or in the vicinity of the object) with station data from local or
global CORS networks. In addition, GNSS data may be utilised to feed various smart sensors, mounted
into the infrastructure body for real-time stability monitoring.
210ANNEXES
APPLICATION DESCRIPTIONS
Annex 3: List of applications
INFRASTRUCTURE PLANNING
Infrastructure site selection and planning: EO can contribute to the selection of sites (e.g. tailing dams)
or routes (e.g. roads/rail) through the provision of products and services such as geological evaluation,
topography mapping, historical data on land subsidence. Through applications like photogrammetry,
laser scanning and remote sensing, GNSS can significantly speed up the accurate determination of site
borders, while also providing adequate methods for development of detailed specialised maps, route
planning or establishment of GIS database with accurate positions of all infrastructure site features. In
addition, to high-accuracy GNSS devices (smart antennas or integrated mapping/GIS devices), GNSS
chipsets can feed high-accuracy positioning data into LiDAR and imaging devices (drone or land-based),
and augmented reality technologies for a-priori in-situ infrastructure visualisation.
Permitting: EO can support the evaluations to be carried out before a permit is delivered for the
construction of a new infrastructure. Thus, EO can deliver products and services related to land cover/
land use mapping, forest mapping, geological evaluation, exposure to natural disasters (e.g. floods),
ground deformation, etc.
Vulnerability Analysis: EO can contribute to the vulnerability assessment for locations prone to
natural hazards for infrastructure planning purposes (in contrast to similar applications in Emergency
Management that focus more on natural disaster preparedness). Relevant EO-based products and
services include historical data on ground deformations, floods, droughts, and fires as well as climate
projections enabling the assessment of the evolution of risks.
TIMING & SYNCHRONISATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORKS
Data centre: A Data Centre is a dedicated space within a building, or a group of buildings used to house
computer systems and associated components, such as telecommunications and storage systems.
GNSS is used as a time source for network synchronisation of computing resources.
Digital Cellular Network (DCN): Telecom operators require accurate and consistent time and frequency
at distant points of their networks to meet increasingly demanding broadband requirements. GNSS is
used to provide consistent frequency and time alignment between all base stations within the network.
DTV Broadcast: GNSS timing receivers provide the means to ensure a continuous and tight
synchronisation of the different media data. Timing and synchronisation, delivered by GNSS, is essential
for a smooth and uninterrupted broadcasting experience.
Professional Mobile Radio (PMR): Telecom operators require accurate and consistent time and
frequency at distant points of their networks to meet increasingly demanding broadband requirements.
GNSS is used for the synchronisation of time slots and handovers between base stations.
Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN): Telecom operators require accurate and consistent
time and frequency at distant points of their networks to meet increasingly demanding broadband
requirements. Originally a network of fixed-line analogue telephone systems, the PSTN is now almost
entirely digital in its core network and in this report it consists of fixed telephone networks. GNSS is
usually a backup to atomic clocks to provide time slot management.
Satellite Communication (SATCOM): Telecom operators require accurate and consistent time and
synchronisation, as well as frequency at distant points of their networks to meet increasingly demanding
broadband requirements. GNSS is typically used in Satellite Control Stations and Telecommunications
Gateways, mostly for frequency control.
Small cells: Telecom operators require accurate and consistent time and frequency at distant points
of their networks to meet increasingly demanding broadband requirements. GNSS is used to provide
frequency and phase alignment in small cell networks.
INSURANCE AND FINANCE
FINANCE
Commodities trading: Commodity trading involves the monitoring of goods production, natural resources
(e.g. oil and gas, mineral resources) and shipping at key locations, providing investors/traders with
information to predict supply and demand to develop their investment strategies. EO can contribute by
providing more information on the calculation of indicators which can help to develop logistics and financing
strategies. Beyond goods and natural resources, there is a growing interest in the food commodity market
for which EO can provide vital information on crop conditions (e.g. the AMIS tool by the FAO).
ESG reporting: EO data can help providing indicators to improve ESG (Environmental, Social, Governance)
measuring, monitoring and reporting, assessing investment’s overall impact and financial returns.
Differently from ESG application analysed under the Climate, Environment, and Biodiversity segment
which helps verifying the fulfilment of environmental requirements, ESG reporting in Finance specifically
focuses on the economic perspective of ESG and can help financial institutions to comply with regulation,
assess risks and monitor physical assets. The revenues of this application are quantified in the Climate,
Environment, and Biodiversity segment under the application Environmental impact assessment and ESG.
Risk assessment: Any investment decision is subject to some uncertainty and before embarking on
a new business, investors need to better understand and assess the risks associated with this new
business and quantify the potential for losses. Combined with other relevant data, EO data can help
investors and asset managers to better understand current and future risks to their investments (e.g.
flood risks, subsidence risk). Similarly, financial institutions increasingly need to consider climate risks in
their assessments. EO constitutes a major source of data to feed their screening processes.
Timing and synchronisation for finance: Financial institutions are legally required to trace operations within
a consistent and accurate time scale. GNSS is therefore used across network operations of both banks and
stock exchanges. For Bank Network Operations, GNSS equipment is used for Time Stamping functions, to
log events chronologically and therefore be able to recreate causal links. Usually, a GPS antenna is deployed
on a roof, and it is connected to a PTP or NTP server. Meanwhile, for Stock Exchange Network Operations all
stock exchanges are equipped with large data centres holding the exchanges’ matching engines in racks of
interconnected servers using GNSS receivers as timing and synchronisation sensors.
INSURANCE
Event footprint: EO serves as a complementary source to support existing processes in assessing
damage. Event footprint involves comparing the claims received from clients with the actual material
damages that occurred in the field to determine the amount of compensation that should be paid. EO
data provides a visualisation of the extent of the damage (production of delineation maps) and helps
optimise intervention, reducing costs for insurers. Responsiveness and high resolution can be important
factors in the choice of EO source. GNSS provides positioning for drones used for pre- and post-event
for analysis and data gathering in the case of insurance claim assessments.
Index production: Computation of numerical indexes (part of parametric insurance products as a certain
index level triggers a payment) based on image analyses. Using regular monitoring of areas to compute
a numerical index, the application is particularly useful for crops and livestock insurance. These products
are an alternative to traditional insurance approaches and allow new markets (farmers and pastors) to
be addressed, especially in remote areas.
Risk modelling: EO can be used for the calibration of risk models and refinement of hypotheses as well
as an input for digital models. Risk modelling involves the evaluation of potential losses that could arise
due to natural disasters through a probabilistic assessment of events. By improving the accuracy of the
predictions, (re)insurers can better forecast cash out-flows and reduce the financial risks, eventually
reducing premiums. EO data is used as a complementary source of information to meteorological and
geological data and generates a moderate added value.
ANNEXES211EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
APPLICATION DESCRIPTIONS
Annex 3: List of applications
MARITIME & INLAND WATERWAYS
INLAND WATERWAYS
Autonomous Surface Vessels: ASVs rely on a combination of EO and GNSS data to navigate and
perform various tasks. GNSS can provide precise positioning and autonomous navigation capabilities,
while EO satellites can capture data related to water conditions and monitor the weather. As of now, this
application is still under development and not fully operational yet.
Collision avoidance (AIS, VDES): Alongside the receivers for navigation, all vessels above 300 GT are
required through the IMO SOLAS regulation to be equipped with an Automatic Identification System
(AIS). Similar to a radar, through the AIS, nearby vessels communicate their position and heading with
each other as well as with shore-based infrastructures (e.g. near ports), in order to improve the traffic
management and safety of navigation. VHF Data Exchange System (VDES) builds upon the capabilities
of AIS and is currently in plan to succeed AIS.
GNSS vessel engine management system: GNSS supports remote monitoring of the ship’s condition
(e.g. engine diagnostics). This provides the vessel operators with the necessary information to perform
routine checks on the engine and improves the overall maintenance of vital elements of the vessel.
Inland waterways navigation: EO data is used to detect periods of flood or low flow which may cause
disruptions to waterway traffic, allowing the bodies responsible for the inland waterways to make
informed decisions about traffic flows. GNSS is also used to ensure safe navigation in inland waterways
(rivers, canals, lakes and estuaries).
MARINE ENGINEERING
Dredging: Satellite-derived turbidity data (stirred-up sediment from anthropogenic activities such as
dredging) provide a reliable and cost-effective overview without the need for field deployment. GNSS,
in combination with PPP/RTK Positioning Techniques, supplies high-accuracy real-time positioning
needed for dredging operations.
Marine surveying and mapping: Encompasses a wide range of GNSS-enabled activities (seabed
exploration, tide and current estimation, offshore surveying, etc.) whose outcomes are key for maritime
navigation. Satellite technology using radar and multi-spectral contributes to surveying and mapping
with data on ocean heights and, as a result, helps to interpret gravity and bathymetry for the Earth's
oceans. Satellite-derived bathymetry, in particular, is the most recently developed method of surveying
shallow waters. In contrast to other survey methods, satellite-derived bathymetry requires no
mobilisation of persons or equipment, provides rapid access to bathymetric data and saves costs.
MERCHANT VESSELS
Maritime Autonomous Surface Ships: MASS refers to a ship which, to a varying degree, can operate
independent of human interaction (i.e. degrees of automation are defined from Degree-1 to -2 by the
IMO). The MASS are typically larger than AVS and are designed for ocean-going transport with different
sets of requirements and equipment needed.
Collision avoidance (AIS, VDES):
Similar with Inland Waterways. However, for Merchant Vessels, the
technology is more complex and advanced as this would be required for ocean transport, as well as to
comply with international regulations.
GNSS vessel engine management systems:
Similar with Inland Waterways. However, for Merchant
Vessels, as it entails a larger vessel and system, additional sensors and systems may be needed,
especially with regard to long-distance ocean transport.
Merchant navigation: GNSS is the primary source of positioning information in sea navigation. In the case
of Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) vessels: all passenger ships, and cargo ships larger than 500 gross tonnage
or larger than 300 tonnes if engaged on international voyages are regulated and heavily rely on GNSS to
support navigation activities. At least three devices are typically fitted on vessels for redundancy reasons.
Navigation through sea ice: Combined with GNSS positioning information, ice maps generated using
EO data enable navigation applications that automatically avoid waters with high iceberg concentrations,
allowing ships to sail faster and more safely through open waters. Reflections of satellite navigation signals
collected in space can be used to accurately map the extent of the sea ice in the Arctic and Antarctic.
Ship route navigation: Real-time or near real-time monitoring of water depth, winds, waves and
currents using EO data enables navigation applications to chart the best routes taking into consideration
current ocean conditions, leading to time and fuel savings. GNSS positioning information constitutes
an essential layer of information for the efficiency, safety and optimisation of maritime transportation.
OCEAN AND ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING
Marine pollution monitoring: SAR-based and optical satellite data can detect and monitor oil spills and
marine litter. EO also provides forecasts of sea currents and sea-surface heights (altimetry), sea-surface
salinity, sea-surface temperature, ocean colour and sea-ice data – useful for monitoring and forecasting
the course of the pollution. Moreover, remote sensing data can also contribute to identifying the polluters.
This application is similar, although with due differences, to the coastal and water ecosystems application
in Climate, Environment, and Biodiversity that encompasses a wider scope for ecosystem monitoring.
PORTS
Automated port operations: GNSS positioning supports the automation of operations at ports and
intermodal hubs.
Piloting assist at ports: EO data on port traffic and metocean conditions is used to complement in situ
data to support Vessel Traffic Management, enabling safer and more efficient piloting of vessels in busy
port environments. Real-time navigation information (based on GNSS devices - PPU) provides pilots
with greater control, safety and accuracy during port approach and manoeuvres.
Port Operations: GNSS-based technologies enhance safety, efficiency and precision during port
operations. This application includes port navigation devices used for monitoring transit progress,
docking and loading-unloading operations; Portable Pilot Units (PPUs) which are professional devices
used by maritime pilots for navigating vessels through narrow passages; and vessel docking systems
that offer necessary precision in positioning and speed, facilitating efficient manoeuvring within the port
area, improved vessel trajectory, and constant monitoring for moored or docked vessels.
Port safety: EO data provides an overview of port traffic and berth estimations, allowing for risk models
to be created. These assess the risk of damage at the port caused by adverse events such as extreme
weather, congestion or oil spills. This enables port officials to take risk mitigation measures and to plan
for safety when developing port infrastructures. The safety of port terminal operations is ensured by
GNSS positioning information, using collision avoidance devices.
Port security: EO data contributes to enhanced situational awareness with the goal of preventing crime
or any illicit good entering or exiting the country. High-resolution SAR data for instance enables port
authorities to access the most recent information on changes in cargo and passenger ports, tracking
vessels, and estimating the amount of stored goods.
212ANNEXES
APPLICATION DESCRIPTIONS
Annex 3: List of applications
RECREATIONAL CRAFT
Recreational navigation: GNSS-based systems for maritime navigation are widespread not only across
commercial but also recreational vessels. They are used both for overseas and high-traffic areas.
VESSEL TRACKING
Dark vessel monitoring: GNSS-enabled Long-Range Identification and Tracking (LRIT) as well as AIS or
VMS provide the means to monitor and track suspicious vessels. When those vessels turn off or disable
their own AIS or VMS, EO data is able to provide enhanced situational awareness that can be used by
dedicated maritime authorities to monitor and track ‘dark vessels’ through EO imagery and SAR data.
RAIL
ATTRACTIVENESS ENHANCEMENT
Passenger information systems: GNSS is used to provide enhanced passenger services such as real-
time location and speed of trains along their route during a journey. Increasingly, GNSS location of trains
is also supporting platform and online passenger information services.
Public transport – tram and light rail: Currently, GNSS is mainly used in smart mobility applications
to optimise the network capacity by managing tram locations or to provide real time information to
passengers such as the estimated arrival time of a tram at a designated station. GNSS has started to
be used for advanced applications, such as automatic speed limitation, ensuring that the tram speed is
lower than a customer-defined speed limit in a specific area. It is also used for maintenance or onboard
energy management, ensuring that the tram's on-board battery has sufficient energy level before
passing a section without external power supply.
MAINTENANCE IMPROVEMENT
Condition-based maintenance: Continuous monitoring of assets movement, performance and potential
damage is used to detect when specific item maintenance is needed based on the defined conditions.
GNSS is increasingly seen as a standard source of location and timing information in these systems.
Infrastructure monitoring: Very high resolution EO satellites data are used in order to detect encroaching
vegetation, landslides or track deformation.
Predictive maintenance: Models relying on continuous location and asset performance monitoring are
developed in order to fine-tune maintenance schedules. GNSS is increasingly seen as a standard source
of location and timing information in these systems.
SAFETY RELATED
Enhanced Command & Control Systems (CCS) : In main lines with high traffic density, GNSS can be
an additional source of data to improve train command and control systems such as the European Train
Control System (ETCS) and the Positive Train Control (PTC). In low density lines, GNSS can support the
provision of a signalling system. For both, it allows cost saving which can be vital to ensure the viability
of the rail service.
Trackside personnel protection systems: Workers must be warned of an approaching train. GNSS
location information is used as a complement to existing procedures for enhanced tools deployed
alongside the train tracks or added information provided to the stakeholders.
TRAIN DRIVING OPTIMISATION
Asset management: Train location provided by GNSS could be used to perform fleet analysis in order to
optimise the use of locomotives and railway cars and to properly size rail fleets.
Driver Advisory Systems (DAS): The real-time location provided by GNSS is used to help drivers operate
their trains. The goal of DAS is to enable train operation optimisation by providing driver assistance.
ANNEXES213EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
APPLICATION DESCRIPTIONS
Annex 3: List of applications
SMART MOBILITY
Congestion control: Satellite road traffic monitoring services collect floating car location data from
vehicles through PNDs, IVS and mobile devices. The traffic information is then processed and distributed
to users and other interested parties. Remote sensing data can be used as an additional layer of
information for monitoring traffic flows.
Infotainment services: Mobility platforms combine various data sources to provide real-time information
and predictions to road users, enabling them (through the vehicle navigation system) to plan and
navigate the most optimal routes. EO supported information include road condition status, real-time
traffic and congestion updates, and weather information.
Navigation (IVS & PND): Navigation is the most widespread application, providing turn-by-turn
indications to drivers through portable navigation devices (PNDs) and in-vehicle systems (IVS) built in
cars.
ROAD & AUTOMOTIVE
ASSET MANAGEMENT
Bike sharing: Bike sharing and especially free-floating bike sharing systems rely on GNSS to locate the
bike across the city by both end users and the bike-sharing service provider.
Public transport – buses: Public transit agencies use GNSS receivers in buses to track their location
in real-time to display their position on a map in the control centre and their expected arrival times on
digital displays at bus stops.
Road asset management: Asset management on-board units (OBUs) and systems transmit GNSS
positioning information through telematics to support transport operators in monitoring the logistics
activities and their performance, as well as to help monitoring vehicles. This application is used within
cars that form a so-called fleet such as taxi’s rental cars and cars used for sharing schemes. It is also
adopted by commercial vehicle fleet owners. As subset, dangerous goods tracking is done by transmitting
GNSS-based positioning data on the vehicles carrying them, together with other information about the
status of the cargo.
LIABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT
Insurance telematics: Black boxes rely on GNSS data to increase the fairness of motor insurance for
both insurers and subscribers. The basic idea behind such schemes is that in combination with other
sensor data, GNSS positioning information is used by insurance companies to monitor the distance
driven as well as driver’s behaviour and related risk (e.g. of having an accident) in order to calculate the
insurance premium that should be charged to each individual.
Road User Charging (RUC): GNSS-OBUs support toll operators in charging levies for the use of roads
and potentially for congestion control. GNSS-based solutions are designed to charge motorists for the
actual distance travelled, without barriers or gantries, and provide interoperability between national
cross-border schemes.
Smart tachograph: Smart tachographs leverage GNSS positioning to support road enforcers by
recording the position and time of the vehicle at different points during the working day.
SAFETY RELATED
Connected and Automated Driving (CAD): CAD enabled by GNSS positioning information feeds
technologies allowing road vehicles to exchange information between other vehicles and their
surroundings. This contributes to the creation of integrated connected platforms supporting mobility
services. In the upcoming years, these will become automated, removing the driver from the driving seat
and having a set of technologies including GNSS to guide and operate the vehicle.
Emergency assistance: The pan-European eCall and other systems, such as the ERA-GLONASS in
Russia, as well as non-regulated solutions developed by OEMs and device vendors send a message
including location to emergency response centres in case of accident, accelerating assistance to drivers.
214ANNEXES
APPLICATION DESCRIPTIONS
Annex 3: List of applications
URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND CULTURAL HERITAGE
ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING
Air quality monitoring in urban environments: Using satellite data and in-situ measurements, EO can
support detecting, collecting, and interpreting information on a multitude of air pollutants, including their
origins, movement, and expected health risks.
Light pollution: Night-time light observations can be performed using EO, for example, to measure
human activities, indicators of urbanisation and electrification, as well as health effects coming from
light pollution.
Thermal auditing: EO provides thermal imagery allowing to measure buildings' efficiency and to detect
thermal defects in these, both during construction as well as for thermal audits of existing buildings.
Urban greening: EO and GNSS can be used to monitor vegetation cover, the health of green space
vegetation as well as precise definition, positioning and monitoring green space infrastructure.
Urban heat islands: EO can support mapping temperatures and temperature variations across urban
areas, for example, as a means to alert health authorities of related risks for specific demographic groups.
SMART CITIES OPERATIONS
Smart streetlights: Smart street lights combine precise GNSS positioning data with other sensors
(e.g. Cameras, photocells) to remotely control the output of individual streetlights, detect faults,
or monitor energy performance. They also facilitate real time alerts for city-wide problems including
traffic flow, parking spaces, electrical outages, and possible accidents.
Smart waste management: GNSS can be used in smart waste management by precisely positioning
waste containers, thereby helping in the monitoring and collection planning of waste.
URBAN PLANNING AND CULTURAL HERITAGE MONITORING
Informal dwellings: EO enables detection of illegal structures outside of planning as well as violations
of property lines.
Real estate: EO data is enabling increased situational awareness for real estate actors as part of the
planning and/or monitoring phases. This includes supporting valuation of land or property, monitoring
the evolution of real estate property projects, or developing analyses and risk assessments for hazard-
prone locations.
Surveying and mapping of urban areas: Using satellite imagery and precise GNSS positioning,
comprehensive geographic data can be collected and analysed, enabling the creation of accurate maps
and spatial information for urban planning, infrastructure development, cultural heritage monitoring and
management, and resource management in cities.
Urban modelling, 3D modelling, Digital Twins: Leveraging digital information, including satellite
imagery and GNSS, to create comprehensive digital representations of urban environments, helps
facilitating urban planning, infrastructure management, and real-time simulations for improved decision-
making in city development and management.
Urban planning: EO empowers urban planning through data-driven insights on various aspects for
sustainable and resilient urban development. EO can measure urban sprawl, density, and sealed
surfaces, as well as change such as increase or decrease of urban deprivation.
SPACE
GUIDANCE, NAVIGATION AND CONTROL SUBSYSTEM
Attitude Determination (AD): Space missions’ success often rely on the pointing accuracy and the
stability of its payloads (e.g. precise communication data link among satellites, precise pointing direction
of a camera to acquire images of a determined area, etc.). Being accurately aware of the vehicle’s
orientation in space allows to apply – if needed – the necessary torques to obtain the desired attitude.
As primary attitude sensor, GNSS can be an excellent option for satellites whose accuracy requirements
are not so stringent. GNSS is also used to complement, or serve as back-up, of more precise systems
such as star trackers.
Precise Orbit Determination (POD): the most accurate determination of the absolute Position, Velocity
and Time (PVT) of the vehicle, whose initial position is unknown, allows potential correction of its orbital
trajectory. GNSS POD has grown in importance and established itself as one of the common techniques
to determine precise trajectories of satellites in LEO. Such GNSS-based information can also be used to
perform “Rendezvous & Docking”, “Formation Flying” or “GEO Station keeping”.
Real-Time Navigation (RTN): Real-time navigation onboard an orbiting vehicle is based on the use
of an orbit propagator; a model that allows predicting the orbital characteristics of the vehicle given
the current orbital characteristics. GNSS is an enabler of real-time navigation by feeding these orbital
propagators with its PVT information, contributing to an increased autonomy and orbital accuracies in
the decametric range when based on multi-constellation and multi-frequency receivers.
Space Timing and Synchronisation (S-T&S): The need for highly precise timing information obtained
through GNSS is relevant in space both for data time stamping (providing a direct and accurate access
to the UTC) and synchronisation (e.g. between receivers at different locations), reducing dependency on
very expensive on-board clocks. These two applications serve as core of data collection in most satellite
missions, including EO or communication. Similar to positioning information, timing can be used both
independently and in conjunction with other data to support more complex tasks.
DEEP SPACE APPLICATIONS
Lunar Orbit (LO): Past the TLO, GNSS will be used to obtain position fixes and velocity vectors once the
vehicles will be established in lunar low orbits. GNSS can reduce tracking and operations costs, provide
a backup/redundant navigation means, or support hosted payloads if it is used as a timing source.
Moon Surface Positioning (MS): Although still to be tested “in-orbit” but with demonstrating missions in
the horizon, GNSS might be used as a source of coarse positioning on the Moon’s surface (or part of it), at
least until the currently conceptualised GNSS-like constellations around the Moon become a reality.
Translunar Orbit (TLO): GNSS can be used as a means of orbital monitoring and determination during
Translunar Orbits (or Moon Transfer Orbits), during which the spacecraft is manoeuvred via propulsive
injections to raise it from a circular Earth orbit to a highly-eccentric orbit, and later to a lunar orbit.
SUPPORTING OR ACTING AS MISSION PAYLOADS
Scientific & Operational Missions (SOM): In the case of scientific missions, GNSS receivers can be used
as a mission payload, providing input to study physical elements, through characteristics of the GNSS
SIS measurements (e.g. radio occultation, altimetry analyses, TEC assessment). In the case of operational
missions, GNSS receivers can be used to support the acquisition of information for commercial purposes
(e.g. taking and selling Earth images/observation data).
Technology Demonstration (TechD): Using GNSS aboard a spacecraft to demonstrate its scientific
interest is the first step to assess its potential use with respect to other conventional technologies. An
example of this type of use is the so called GNSS Reflectometry (GNSS-R), which consists of making
measurements of the reflections of navigation signals from GNSS from the Earth.
ANNEXES215EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
ACRONYMS
Annex 4: List of acronyms
2D Two-dimensional ARAIM Advanced Receiver Autonomous Integrity Monitoring CASA Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis
3D Three-dimensional ARI Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) Reality Index CAT 1 Category 1
3GPP 3rd Generation Partnership Project ASC Aquaculture Stewardship Council CCAM Cooperative, connected and automated mobility
4D Four-dimensional spacetime ASI Agricultural Stress Index CCM Copernicus Contributing Missions
5D Fifth-dimensional - Real-time extraction in virtual model ASIL Automotive Safety Integrity Level CCO Continuous Climb Operations
5G Fifth-generation of mobile telecommunications technology AsSiSt Aircraft Support & Maintenance Services CDO Continuous Descent Operations
6G Sixth-generation of mobile telecommunications technology ATC Air Traffic Control CDSE Copernicus Data Space Ecosystem
A4E Airlines for Europe ATIS Alliance for Telecommunications Industry Solutions CDS Climate Data Store
AAQS Ambient Air Quality Standards ATM Air Traffic Management CEMS Copernicus Emergency Management Service
ACI Airport’s Council International AUV Autonomous Underwater Vehicles CEN European Committee for Standardisation
AD Attitude Determination B2B Business-to-Business CENELEC European Electrotechnical Committee for Standardisation
ADS Automated driving system BBNJ Biodiversity Beyond National Jurisdiction CFP Common Fisheries Policy
ADS-B Automatic Dependent Surveillance - Broadcast BDPS Beacon Distress Positioning Sharing Service CH Cultural heritage
ADS-L Automatic Dependent Surveillance - Light BDS BeiDou Satellite System CI Critical Infrastructure
AED Automated External Defibrillator BIM Building Information Modelling CIMR Copernicus Imaging Microwave Radiometer
Agtech Agricultural technology BSGN British Space Group Network CIS Common Information Services
AI Artificial Intelligence BVLOS Beyond Visual Line of Sight CISP Common Information Services Provider
AIRE Airlines International Representation in Europe C3S Copernicus Climate Change Service CLMS Copernicus Land Monitoring Service
AIS Automatic Identification System C4EC Copernicus for EC CLUG Certifiable Localisation Unit with GNSS
AIS-MOB Automatic Identification System Man Overboard Beacon CAD Connected and Automated Driving CMEMS Copernicus Marine Environment Monitoring Service
AIS-SART Automatic Identification System Search and Rescue Tran-
smitters CAGR Compound Annual Growth Rate CNS Communication, navigation and surveillance
AMC Acceptable Means of Compliance CAMS Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service CO2 Carbon dioxide
AMIS Agricultural Market Information System CANSO Civil Air Navigation Service Organisation CO2M Copernicus Anthropogenic Carbon Dioxide Monitoring
ANAS The Italian Road Authority CAP Common Agricultural Policy cOBC Constellation On-Board Computer
AQGs Air Quality Guidelines CAS Cooperative Applications Satellite CODA Copernicus Online Data Access
AR Augmented Reality CAS Commercial Authentication Service COP Conference of Parties
216ANNEXES
ACRONYMS
Annex 4: List of acronyms
COP15 Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention
on Biological Diversity EASA European Union Aviation Safety Agency EMSA European Maritime Safety Agency
COP27 Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change EBA European Banking Authority EN European harmonised standard
COSPAS-
-SARSAT
Cosmicheskaya Sistyema Poiska Avariynich Sudov/Search
And Rescue Satellite Aided Tracking EBAA European Business Aviation Association ENSPACE Enhanced Navigation in Space Project
COTS Commercial-Off-The-Shelf e-bikes Electric bicycle ENVISAT ENVIronmental SATellite
COVID19 Coronavirus disease EC DRMKC European Commission Disaster Risk Management
Knowledge Centre EO Earth Observation
CRMA Critical Raw Materials Act EC European Commission EO4EA Earth Observation for Ecosystem Accounting
CSCDA Copernicus Space Component Data Access system EC Electronic Conspicuity EO4I Earth Observation Best Practice for Agro-Insurance
CSRD Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive ECA European Compliance Assurance
CSRISTAL Copernicus Polar Ice and Snow Topography Altimeter ECARO EGNOS Civil Aviation Roadmap EO4SD Earth Observation for Sustainable Development
CSS Copernicus Security Service ECMWF European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts EPIRBs Emergency Position Indicating Radio Beacons
DAA Detect & Avoid EDAS EGNOS Data Access Service ERA European Regions Airline Association
DAS Driver Advisory Systems EDO European Drought Observatory ERCC Emergency Response Coordination Centre
DCN Digital Cellular Network EEA European Environment Agency ERTMS European Railway Transport Management System
DEM Digital Elevation Model EFAS European Flood Awareness System ESA European Space Agency
DFMC Dual Frequency Multi-Constellation EFCA European Fisheries Control Agency ESG Environmental, Social, and Governance
DG MARE Directorate-General for Maritime Affairs and Fisheries EFFIS European Forest Fire Information System ESMA European Securities and Markets Authority
DIAS Data and Information Access Services EFRAG European Financial Reporting Advisory Group ESRS European Sustainability Reporting Standards
DLR German Aerospace Center (Deutsches Zentrum für Luft-
und Raumfahrt) EGMS European Ground Motion Service ETC Electronic Toll Collection
DLT Dominant Leaf Type EGNOS European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service ETC/CCA European Topic Centre on Climate Change Impacts, Vulne-
rability and Adaptation
DLT Distributed Ledger Technology EGNSS European Global Navigation Satellite System ETCS European Train Control System
DO Drought Observatory EHA European Helicopter Association EU European Union
DSM Digital Surface Model EIA Environmental Impact Assessment EU SatCen European Union Satellite Centre
DSRC Dedicated Short-Range Communications ELT Emergency Locator Transmitter EUDR European Union Deforestation-Free Products Regulation
DTSC Digitial Twins of Smart Cities ELT-DT ELT Distress Tracking EUMETSAT European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorologi-
cal Satellites
E112 GNSS-supported emergency call EMAid Emergency Management and Humanitarian Aid EUROCAE European Organisation for Civil Aviation Equipment
EARSC European Association of Remote Sensing Companies EMODnet European Marine Observation and Data Network
ANNEXES217EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
ACRONYMS
Annex 4: List of acronyms
EUSPA European Union Agency for the Space Programme GAST-D GBAS Approach Service Type D GNSS-RO GNSS Radio Occultation
EV Electric Vehicle GAST-F GBAS Approach Service Type F GOFC-Fi-
re IT
Global Observation of Forest Cover - Fire Implementation
Team
eVTOL Electric Vertical Take-off and Landing GBAS Ground-Based Augmentation System GOFC-
-GOLD
Global Observation of Forest Cover - Global Observation of
Land Dynamics
EWS Emergency Warning System GBFF Global Biodiversity Framework Fund GOVSAT-
COM Governmental Satellite Communications
FA Flagship Area GDO Global Drought Observatory GPR Ground Penetration Radar
FADA-CA-
TEC
Fundación Andaluza para el Desarrollo Aeroespacial (An-
dalusian Foundation for Aerospace Development) Spain GDOP Geometric Dilution of Precision GPS Global Positioning System
FAO Food and Agricultural Organisation of the United Nations GDPR General Data Protection Regulation GSM Global System for Mobile Communications
FCC Federal Communications Commission GEF Global Environment Facility GTOS Global Terrestrial Observing System
FCD Floating Car Data GEO Group on Earth Observations GVA Gross value added
FFO Full, Free and Open GEO Geosynchronous Equatorial Orbit (geostationary orbit) GWIS Global Wildfire Information System
FINRA Financial Industry Regulatory Authority GEOSAR Geostationary Orbit Search and Rescue H2020 Horizon 2020 (Research and Innovation Programme by the
European Commission
FIs Financial Institutions GEOSS Global Earth Observation System of Systems H2H Hull-to-Hull
FISE Forest Information System for Europe GERICS Climate Service Center Germany HAB Harmful Algae Bloom
FLARM Flight alarm GHG Greenhouse Gases HAOs High-Altitude Operations
FMC Fishing Monitoring Centre GIEWS Global Information and Early Warning System on Food and
Agriculture HAPS High Altitude Platform Systems
FMS Farm Management System GIS Geographic Information System H-ARAIM High Availability Advanced Receiver Autonomous Integrity
Monitoring
FP6 Sixth Framework Programme GloFAS Global Flood Awareness System HAS High Accuracy Service
FRAC Final Review and Comment GLONASS Global'naya Navigatsionnaya Sputnikovaya / GNSS by the
Russian Federation HEMS Helicopter Emergency Medical Services
FRONTEX European Border and Coast Guard Agency GLU 2100 Ground & Landing Unit (Multi Mode receiver) HERA Health Emergency Response Authority
FTY Forest Type GM Guidance Material HPC High Performance Computing
GADSS Global Aeronautical Distress and Safety System GMES Global Monitoring for Environment and Security HQ Headquarters
GAGAN Indian SBAS GMP Global Methane Pledge HR High Resolution
Galileo SAR Galileo Search and Rescue GMR Governmental Market Report HRAP Holistic Resilience Assessment Platform
GALITS Galileo Localization In Train Signalling GNC Guidance, Navigation and Control HR-VPP High Resolution Vegetation Phenology and Productivity
GAST Ground-Airborne System Test GNSS Global Navigation Satellite System HVAC Heating, ventilation and air conditioning
218ANNEXES
ACRONYMS
Annex 4: List of acronyms
IACA International Air Carrier Association IoT Internet of Things LPV Localiser Performance with Vertical Guidance
IADC Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee IoV In-Orbit Validation LSTM Copernicus Land Surface Temperature Monitoring
IAGOS In-service Aircraft for a Global Observing System IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change LTE Long Term Evolution
IAM Innovative Air Mobility IPM Integrated Pest Management LUCAS Land Use/Cover Area frame Survey
IATA International Air Transport Association IRIDeS International Institute of Disaster Science LuGRE Lunar GNSS Receiver Experiment
ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization ISO International Organization for Standardization MaaS Mobility-as-a-Service
ICD Interface Control Document ISSB International Sustainability Standards Board MASS Maritime Autonomous Surface Ships
ICT Information and Communication Technology ITS Intelligent Transport Systems MBDs Mosquito-Borne Diseases
IDD Internet Data Distribution ITU International Telecommunications Union MEO Medium Earth Orbit
IDPs Internally displaced persons IUCN International Union for Conservation of Nature MEOLUT Medium Earth Orbit Local User Terminal
IEC International Electrotechnical Commission IUU Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated fishing MEOSAR Medium Earth Orbit Satellites Search and Rescue System
IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers IVS In-Vehicle Systems Metop-SG Meteorological Operational Satellite - Second Generation
IFC In-flight Connectivity IWES Fraunhofer Institute for Wind Energy Systems MiFiD II Markets in Financial Instruments Directive
IGS SSR International GNSS Service standards IWW Inland waterway ML Machine Learning
IIoT Industrial Internet of Things JARUS Joint Authorities for Rulemaking on Unmanned Systems MOB Man OverBoard
IISD International Institute for Sustainable Development JRC Joint Research Centre MODIS Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer
ILS Instrument Landing System KIC Knowledge and Innovation Community MOPS Minimum Operational Performance Standards
IMO International Maritime Organisation L3 Level 3 MoU Memorandum of Understanding
IMPEL Implementation and Enforcement of Environmental Law LaaS Logistics-as-a-Service MPLs Minimum Performance Levels
IMUs Inertial Measurement Units LANDSAT "land" and "satellite." MS Moon Surface positioning
INI Own-Initiative Procedure LDACS L-band Digital Aeronautical Communications System MSAS Japanese Satellite Based Augmentation System
INS Inertial Navigation System LEO Low Earth Orbit MSC Maritime Safety Committee
InSAR Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar LEOSAR Low Earth Orbit Search and Rescue MSP Maritime Spatial Planning
IOC Initial Operational Capability LGBTQ+ Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer or questioning,
intersex, asexual, and more MTG-S Meteosat Third Generation (Sounding)
IOPA International Aircraft Owners and Pilots LiDAR Light Detection and Ranging
IoS In-Orbit Satellite LO Lunar Orbit
ANNEXES219EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
MUAC Maastricht Upper Area Control Centre PDOP Position Dilution of Precision RACE Rapid Action on COVID-19 and EO
MUGG MUlti-mode Global positioning system (GPS) and Galileo PHAR PBN for HEMS in the Italian Apulia Region RAS Researchlab Autonomous Shipping
NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration PinS Point-in-Space RBA Remote Beacon Activation
NavIC Navigation with Indian Constellation/Indian Regional Navi-
gation Satellite System PLB Personal Locator Beacon RES Renewable Energy Sources
NBS Nature-based Solutions PMR Professional Mobile Radio RF Radio Frequency
NDVI Normalized Difference Vegetation Index PMU Phasor Measurement Unit RFI Radio Frequency Interference
NEO Near-Earth Objects PND Personal Navigation Device RIN Royal Institute of Navigation
NeRF Neural Radiance Field PNT Positioning, Navigation, and Timing RIS Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces
NFMS National Forest Monitoring System POCs Proof-of-Concepts RLM Return Link Message
NG112 New Generation of E112 POD Precise Orbit Determination RLS Return Link Service
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation PPAs Power Purchase Agreements RLSP Return Link Service Provider
NIR Near-infrared PPP Precise Point Positioning RNP3 Required Navigation Performance
NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association PPPs Public-Private Partnerships RNSS Radio Navigation Satellite Services
NPA Notice of Proposed Amendment PPU Power Processing Unit RNTF Resilient Navigation and Timing Foundation
NRT Near real-time PPUs Portable Pilot Units ROV Remotely Operated Vehicles
NSP Navigation System Panel ROSE-L Copernicus L-band Synthetic Aperture Radar
NTN Non-Terrestrial Networks PRC People's Republic of China RTCA Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics
NTRIP Networked Transport of RTCM via Internet Protocol PRS Public Regulated Service RTCM Radio Technical Commission for Maritime Services
OCHA United Nations Office for Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs PSD2 Directive of Payment Services RTK Real-Time Kinematics
ODA Official Development Assistance PSTN Public-Switched Telephone Network RTN Real-Time Navigation
OEMs Original Equipment Manufacturers PVs Photovoltaics RUC Road User Charging
OS Open Service PVT Position, Velocity and Time SaaS Synchronisation-as-a-Service
OSNMA Galileo Open Service Navigation Message Authentication QNH Question Nil Height (measurement; pressure at sea-le-
vel; aviation) SAE Society of Automotive Engineers
OT Operational technology QZSS Quasi-Zenith Satellite System/regional navigation satellite
system commissioned by the Japanese Government SaaS Synchronisation-as-a-Service
OTA Over-the-air R&D Research and Development SAE Society of Automotive Engineers
PBN Performance-based navigation R&I Research and Innovation
ACRONYMS
Annex 4: List of acronyms
220ANNEXES
ACRONYMS
Annex 4: List of acronyms
SAE levels Society of Automotive Engineers setting levels for autono-
mous driving SOC Security Operation Centre TLO Translunar Orbit
SAR Search and Rescue SoL Safety of Life Service TPEG Transport Protocol Experts Group
SAR Synthetic Aperture Radar SOM Scientific and Operational Missions TPEG-
2-EAW Emergency Alerts and Warnings technology
SARPs Standards and Recommended Practices SORA Specific Operations Risk Assessment TSI Technical Specifications for Interoperability
SARSAT Search and Rescue Satellite Aided Tracking SRTM Shuttle Radar Topography Mission TSN Time-Sensitive Networks
SATCOM Satellite communications SSA Space Situational Awareness TTFF Time To First Fix
SB Service Bulletin SST Space Surveillance and Tracking TWC Two-Way Communication
SBAS Satellite-Based Augmentation System SSV Space Service Volume UAM Urban Air Mobility
SCADA Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition S-T&S Space Timing and Synchronisation UAS Unmanned Aircraft Systems
SDA Space Domain Awareness STC Supplemental Type Certificate UAT Universal Access Transceiver
SDCM System for Differential Corrections and Monitoring (Russian
SBAS) STM Space Traffic Management UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
SDG Sustainable Development Goals SUGUS Solution for EGNSS U-Space Service UCP User Consultation Platform
SDI Spatial Data Infrastructures SVS Synthetic Vision Systems UHI Urban Heath Island
SDR Software Defined Radio SWE Space Weather UITP International Association of Public Transport
SDRs Software-defined Receivers SWIR Short-Wave Infrared UK United Kingdom
SEA Copernicus Service in Support to EU External Action T&S Timing and Synchronisation UN ICG United Nations International Committee on GNSS
SEC U. S. Securities and Exchange Commission TaaS Transportation-as-a-Service UN United Nations
SESAR Single European Sky ATM Research TaaS Time-as-a-Service UNCLOS United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
SFDR Sustainable Finance Disclosure Regulation TAWS Terrain Awareness Warning Systems UNEA United Nations Environment Assembly
SIS Sectoral Information System TCD Tree Cover Density UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Orga-
nisation
SiS Signal-in-Space TCFD Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development Organisation
SLAM Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping TechD Technology Demonstration UNOOSA United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs
SME Small and Medium-sized Enterprise TEWS Tsunami Early Warning Systems UNWTO United Nations World Tourism Organization
SNAS Satellite Navigation Augmentation System (PRC) TGV High-Speed Train US United States
SNCF Société Nationale des Chemins de Fer Français TISA Trade in Services Agreement USA United States of America
ANNEXES221EUSPA EO and GNSS Market Report | Issue 2, 2024
ACRONYMS
Annex 4: List of acronyms
USGS United States Geological Survey
U-space Unmanned Aircraft Systems Airspace Management
USSPs U-space Service Providers
UTC Universal Time Coordinated
UTM Unmanned Traffic Management
UV Ultraviolet (UV) radiation
V2X Vehicle to everything
VAAC Volcanic ash advisory centres
VAS Value-added Service
VBDs Vector-Borne Diseases
VDES Very High Frequency Data Exchange System
VFR Visual Flight rules
VHF Very High Frequency
VHR Very High Resolution
VHTS Very High Throughput Satellites
VIIRS Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite
VLL Very Low Level
VMS Vessel Monitoring System
VR Virtual Reality
WAAS Wide Area Augmentation System
WAM Wide Area Monitoring
WFD Water Framework Directive
WG- C Working Group C
WG Working Group
WHO World Health Organisation
Wi-Fi Wireless Fidelity
WWF World Wide Fund for Nature
222ANNEXES
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Annex 5: About the authors
The European Commission
European Commission (EC) and more specifically the Directorate
General for Defence Industry and Space (DG DEFIS) has overall
responsibility for the implementation of the Union Space
Programme and its components (Galileo, EGNOS, Copernicus,
GOVSATCOM and SSA).
This includes:
• Overseeing the implementation of all activities related to the programme;
• Defining its priorities and long-term evolution;
• Managing the funds allocated to the programme;
• Ensuring a clear division of responsibilities and tasks, in particular between the EU Agency for the
Space Programme and the European Space Agency;
• Ensuring proper reporting on the programme to the Member States of the EU, the European Parliament
and the Council of the European Union.
DG DEFIS further contributes to shaping the EU space policy and fostering a strong, innovative and
resilient EU space ecosystem. It supports the emergence of New Space in the EU, including SMEs and
new entrants, fosters entrepreneurship and access to finance, and contributes to the growth of the EU
space industry.
DG DEFIS promotes EU space research fostering a cost-effective, competitive and innovative space
industry and research community. It ensures that space technology, services and applications meet EU
policy needs, and the R&I needs of the EU Space Programme. It also ensures that the EU can access and
use space with a high level of autonomy.
The EU space policy addresses some of the most pressing challenges facing the EU today, such as
fighting climate change, supporting EU’s priorities, whilst strongly contributing to the green and digital
transitions and to the resilience of the Union.
The European Union Agency
for the Space Programme
EUSPA is the operational European Union Agency for the Space
Programme. It adopts a user-oriented approach to promote
sustainable growth and improve the security and safety of the
European Union. EUSPA’s mission revolves around three core
principles: service provision, market growth, and security.
The EU Agency for the Space Programme:
• Provides state-of-the-art, safe and secure positioning, navigation and timing services based on
Galileo and EGNOS, cost-effective satellite communications services for GOVSATCOM and soon
IRIS2, and Front Desk services of the EU Space Surveillance Tracking whilst ensuring the systems’
service continuity and robustness.
• Promotes and maximises the use of data and services offered by Galileo, EGNOS, Copernicus,
GOVSATCOM and soon IRIS 2 across a broad range of domains.
• Fosters the development of a vibrant European space ecosystem by providing market intelligence,
and technical know-how to innovators, academia, start-ups, and SMEs. The agency leverages Horizon
Europe, other EU funding, and innovative procurement mechanisms.
• Implements and monitors the security of the EU Space Programme components in space and on the
ground with the aim to enhance the security of the Union and its Member States; EUSPA operates the
Galileo Service Monitoring Centre.
The Security Accreditation Board established within the Agency is the security accreditation authority
for all of the Programme’s components, where Member States take accreditation decisions in a strictly
independent manner from the Programme.
The authors would like to convey special thanks to the contributors to this report:
• EY Belgium
• EGIS
• Evenflow Consulting
• FDC
• LE Europe

© 2024 European Union Agency for the Space Programme
Copyright note: This information can be republished without charge provided the EU Agency
for the Space Programme (EUSPA) is acknowledged. If you do republish, we would be grateful
if you link back to the EUSPA website (www.euspa.europa.eu).
ISBN 978-92-9206-079-4
TS-AF-24-001-EN-N
EUSPA Mission Statement
The mission of the European Union Agency for the Space Programme (EUSPA) is defined by the EU Space Programme Regulation. EUSPA’s mission is to be the user-oriented operational Agency of the EU
Space Programme, contributing to sustainable growth, security and safety of the European Union.
The EU Agency for the Space Programme:
• Provides state-of-the-art, safe and secure positioning, navigation and timing services based on Galileo and EGNOS, cost-effective satellite communications services for GOVSATCOM and soon IRIS 2,
and Front Desk services of the EU Space Surveillance Tracking whilst ensuring the systems’ service continuity and robustness.
• Promotes and maximises the use of data and services offered by Galileo, EGNOS, Copernicus, GOVSATCOM and soon IRIS 2 across a broad range of domains.
• Fosters the development of a vibrant European space ecosystem by providing market intelligence, and technical know-how to innovators, academia, start-ups, and SMEs. The agency leverages Horizon
Europe, other EU funding, and innovative procurement mechanisms.
• Implements and monitors the security of the EU Space Programme components in space and on the ground with the aim to enhance the security of the Union and its Member States; EUSPA operates
the Galileo Service Monitoring Centre.
The Security Accreditation Board established within the Agency is the security accreditation authority for all of the Programme’s components, where Member States take accreditation decisions in a strictly
independent manner from the Programme.
The European Union Agency for the Space Programme: linking space to user needs.
market@euspa.europa.eu
www.euspa.europa.eu
@EU4Space
EUSPA
@space4eu





2023/ISSUE 1
#EUSpace
More information on the European Union is available on the Internet (http://europa.eu). 
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2023
Catalogue number: TS-03-23-438-EN-N
ISSN: 978-92-9206-076-3
doi: 0.2878/961897
Copyright © European Union Agency for the Space Programme, 2023. This document and the information contained in it is subject to applicable copyright and other intellectual property rights under the laws 
of the Czech Republic and other states. This document and information contained in this document may be excerpted, copied, printed, republished, made available to the public by wire or wireless means and/
or otherwise provided to third parties only under the condition that the source and copyright owner is clearly stated as follows: “Source: EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report, Issue 1, 
copyright © European Union Agency for the Space Programme, 2023”. If you do republish we would be grateful if you link back to the EUSPA website www.euspa.europa.eu. No part of this document, including 
any part of the information contained therein, in whichever format, whether digital or otherwise, may be altered, edited or changed without prior express and written permission of the European Union Agency 
for the Space Programme, to be requested via https://www.euspa.europa.eu/about/contact, clearly stating the element (document and/or information) and term of use requested. For reproduction or use of photos 
and any other artistic material, permission may have to be directly obtained from the copyright holder. The designations employed, the representation of the materials and the views expressed by authors, editors, 
or expert groups, other EU agencies and/or their staff members or other third parties, do not necessarily represent the opinions or the stated policy of either EUSPA or the European Union. The mention of specific 
companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by the EUSPA in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions 
excepted, the names of proprietary products and copyright holders are distinguished by initial capital letters. The present document is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either express or implied in 
relation to its content and/or use. To the extent permitted by the applicable law, the EUSPA shall not be liable for any damages arising from the content and use of the present document. Should you become aware 
of any breach of the above terms of use, please notify the European Union Agency for the Space Programme immediately, through the above-mentioned contact site. Any breach of these terms of use may be 
subject to legal proceedings, seeking monetary damages and/or an injunction to stop the unlawful use of the document and/or any information contained therein. The above terms of use shall be governed by the 
EU law and the national substantive law of Belgium. The courts of Brussels shall have jurisdiction to give judgement for any claims arising out of these terms of use. By downloading, forwarding, and/or copying 
this document or any parts thereof, in whichever format, whether digital or otherwise, the user acknowledges and accepts the above terms of use as applicable to him/her.
2023/ISSUE 1
#EUSpace
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 4
FOREWORD
(1) EUR-Lex – 32021R0696 – EN – EUR-Lex (europa.eu)
Dear Reader,
The space industry is rapidly evolving as we enter a new era – also in satellite communications. New frequency bands, the 
demand for High-Throughput Satellite (HTS) Systems, and the rise of optical communications and quantum encryption 
techniques, have spurred the development of novel products, software and applications. Agile New Space players are 
embracing these trends to develop services benefiting diverse users in both public and private sectors. 
Secure satellite communications (henceforth secure SATCOM) are essential for the resilience and strategic autonomy of the 
European Union and its Member States, both in space and on the ground. Secure SATCOM provide the basis for security- and 
safety-critical missions and operations, including crisis management, land and border surveillance and protection of the key 
infrastructure. 
The European Union is working on the deployment of GOVSATCOM, a component already part of the EU Space Regulation 
(20211), while preparing the ground for the ambitious IRIS2, the new EU Secure Connectivity Programme. Those systems will complement the EU Space 
Programme and its components for Navigation (Galileo and EGNOS), Earth Observation (Copernicus) and Space Situational Awareness.
In this context, EUSPA produced the first-ever Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report. The report addresses the market component of the Secure 
SATCOM, both in terms of industrial and governmental landscape and its forecasted use in the period 2025–2040, as well as its technology component. 
The market part offers a comprehensive review of various Secure SATCOM use cases across its three macro-families: Crisis Management, Surveillance and 
Key Infrastructure. We forecast that the demand for Secure SATCOM services should grow by a factor of 14 over the 2025–2040 period, to reach almost 
190 Gbps in 2040. While Crisis Management accounts for almost half of the total capacity demand of secure SATCOM in 2025, we estimate that the Key 
Infrastructures should generate a higher level of demand during the period 2030–2040. This is driven by increased demand for institutional/diplomatic 
communications as well as the need for reliable, secure and guaranteed communications for a variety of other infrastructures, including energy and finance, 
governmental digital platforms and the overall increase of strategic data centres. 
The technology part provides an overview of the technologies currently shaping the industry. It identifies key trends such as the introduction of softwaredefined satellites, the deployment of new satellite constellation systems in low Earth orbits, the increased capacity offered by High-Throughput Satellite (HTS) 
Systems and higher frequency bands, optical communications, the deployment of multi-orbit and multi-band terminals and 5G interoperability. 
Recent geopolitical tensions at the borders of our continent have spurred demand for secured, robust and uninterrupted SATCOM. Therefore, this report 
underscores the added value of space-based secure connectivity for authorized governmental users in their relevant fields. It aims at assisting stakeholders 
in identifying business opportunities, laying the groundwork for market development, and realizing the benefits of secure communications initiatives, both in 
the EU and globally. 
Happy reading!
Rodrigo da Costa,
EUSPA Executive Director
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 5
HOW TO READ THIS REPORT
How to read this report
The European Union Agency for the Space Programme (EUSPA) welcomes all readers to this first issue of the Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report. As the first edition, this 
report marks EUSPA’s entry into the realm of secure SATCOM. With its diverse array of reports, EUSPA comprehensively covers all components of the EU Space Programme (GNSS, Earth 
Observation and now also Secure Satellite Communications), therefore providing valuable insights into the dynamic landscape of space technologies and services.
Secure SATCOM provides one or two-way reliable, accessible and guaranteed satellite capacity/service for communications (cf. definition in Annex 2). This specialized facet operates within 
the broader SATCOM domain, sharing similar space-based systems and involving equivalent actors along the value chain. As such, technological and economic trends that affect SATCOM 
also exert influence on secure SATCOM, establishing a logical correlation.
The secure SATCOM market is structured in 13 use cases, sorted into 4 categories, as follows: Surveillance (Land, Border and Maritime), Crisis Management (Maritime Emergency, 
Humanitarian Aid, Civil Protection, Law Enforcement Interventions, EU (European Union) External Actions and Forces Deployment), Key Infrastructure (Transport Infrastructures, Space 
Infrastructures, Institutional Communications and Other Critical infrastructures) and secure communications in Polar regions. Users of the EU secure SATCOM services are the governmental 
entities from European Union Member States, European Union agencies & organisations and are located in the European Union or deployed worldwide. 
The Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology report is structured as follows:
• A general overview presents the EU Space Programme, addressing its components: Galileo, EGNOS (European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service), Copernicus, GOVSATCOM 
(GOVernmental SATellite COMmunications) and SSA (Space Situational Awareness), as well as the IRIS2 (Infrastructure for Resilience, Interconnectivity and Security by Satellite). A 
specific focus in this report is put on GOVSATCOM IRIS2 and their synergies with the other components. This report specifically highlights how GOVSATCOM today and IRIS2 tomorrow, 
will position themselves for the provision of secure SATCOM services to eligible governmental users. 
• Delving further into the characterisation of secure SATCOM, the core of the report lies within the Secure SATCOM Market Demand section, which includes:
• An overview of the SATCOM market value. Given that secure SATCOM is an integral component of the broader SATCOM domain, the aim is to underscore the primary trends shaping 
the value of the secure SATCOM market.
• An estimate of the secure SATCOM capacity demand, by eligible EU governmental users, with a forecast covering the 2025–2040 period for the three use case categories.
• A specific analysis to assess a set of Key Performances Parameters (KPP).
• A presentation and characterisation of several pertinent use cases, encompassing: Key stakeholders, Interconnected units and Secure SATCOM utilization, Demand dynamics and 
motivators, Trends and Geographic scope.
• Following the examination of the demand aspect, the report proceeds to analyse the Secure SATCOM Market Supply, from both governmental and commercial entities providing insights 
into potential developments spanning the period 2025 to 2040.
• Finally, a detailed end-to-end secure SATCOM system containing ground, space and user segments is presented in the Secure SATCOM Technology section. The aim is to help the 
potential users to grasp and establish a connection between the technical characteristics of the SATCOM services and their significance. Key technological factors, as well as drivers 
and inhibitors and Cybersecurity elements are addressed to present the technology evolution in the near and upcoming future. It’s important noting that, as the satellite communication 
market is in constant evolution (e.g. new entrants, evolution and consolidation of existing players, etc.) the information contained in this report is provided as-is and might not fully capture 
recent developments.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 6
TABLE OF CONTENT
FOREWORD 4
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 7
THE EU SPACE PROGRAMME 8
SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND 20
USE CASES PRESENTATION 21
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM DEMAND 23
SECURE SATCOM DEMAND PER KPP 37
USE CASES PRESENTATION 41
SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY 57
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM SUPPLY 58
SECURE SATCOM GOVERNMENTAL SUPPLY 63
SECURE SATCOM COMMERCIAL SUPPLY 69
SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY 75
DEFINITION OF SPACE-BASED SYSTEMS FOR SECURE SATCOM 76
SPACE SEGMENT 77
GROUND SEGMENT 84
USER SEGMENT 87
KEY TECHNOLOGICAL FACTORS ENABLING FUTURE SECURE SATCOM 94
CYBERSECURITY 104
ANNEXES 109 
ANNEX 1: LIST OF ACRONYMS 109
ANNEX 2: KEY TERMS 112
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 7
Executive summary
The European Union needs independent, secure, resilient and high-speed spacebased connectivity to satisfy the needs of European Union institutions, bodies, agencies 
and Member States. Secure SATCOM provides one or two-way reliable, accessible and 
guaranteed satellite capacity/service for communications.
The first edition of the Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report provides 
insights into the varied contributions of secure SATCOM across a range of governmental 
applications. These applications are categorized into three distinct use case categories: 
Surveillance, Crisis Management, and Key Infrastructure. Collectively, the report explores 
a total of 13 comprehensive individual use cases. Unless specified, the report addresses 
aspects related to the secure SATCOM market and user technology in the European Union 
(EU), though some considerations (e.g. economic and technological trends) also applyied at 
a global level.
Relying on those 13 use cases, the demand for secure SATCOM for EU and its Members 
States is estimated to significantly increase over the 2025–2040 period, moving from 19 
Gbps in 2025 to 186 Gbps in 2040 (CAGR of 16% – Compound Annual Growth Rate). The 
demand will come from a variety of assets and organisations who are estimated to benefit 
from the provision of services and capacities from GOVSATCOM and in a later stage, the EU 
Secure Connectivity Programme IRIS2. Two types of satellite communication services 
are typically provided: MSS (Mobile Satellite Services) and FSS (Fixed Satellite Services), 
which use of different frequency-bands. FSS were initially designed for fixed users, while 
MSS were designed for mobile users. However, due to technological advancements, FSS 
serves effectively to cater the mobile users, resulting in blurring the boundaries between 
FSS and MSS. FSS satellite capacity demand is estimated to represent the largest part of 
the anticipated traffic, most likely addressed via Ku-band, Ka-band and X-band. Traffic 
for the Crisis Management use case category is estimated to represent almost 50% of 
the total demand over the 2025 – 2040 period, primarily driven by the demand expected 
to support Forces Deployment. From a geographical perspective, about two-thirds of the 
FSS capacity demand comes from the EU continent & waters, followed by Middle East & 
Africa. The future use of secure SATCOM solutions will also be contingent upon the future 
supply. In particular, the level of demand, and in practice consumption of secure SATCOM 
will depend on the capacity and solutions being offered to end users in the observed 
period. Factors such as service type, volume, cost, and the availability of suitable user 
terminals with appropriate interoperability, affordability and easily deployable, are pivotal 
in shaping consumption.
The supply of secure SATCOM capacity/services can rely on the expertise and worldrenowned excellence of the European space industry in the satellite communications sector, 
integrating the know-how of leading industrial players, such as manufacturers, launch 
service providers, satellite distribution partners, satellite operators/service providers with 
the dynamism of an emerging New Space ecosystem. Secure SATCOM capacity can be 
provided to end-users via both EU governmental systems and EU commercial companies. 
Capacity from geostationary satellites is available and forecast to remain available in all 
major frequency-bands being used to support voice and data streams, enabling various 
applications. Such capacity is limited in certain locations (especially outside European 
Union) and might be not sufficient to cover the whole aggregated expected demand. 
Capacity from assets located in NGSO (Non-GeoStationary Orbit) is currently available 
from an EU company through a single constellation of satellites operating in MEO (Medium 
Earth Orbit), in Ka-band, whose services are planned to be enhanced in 2023. While third 
countries have unveiled government-backed initiatives, the multi-orbit constellation IRIS2
shall complement and integrate the existing and future capacities of the GOVSATCOM 
component of the European Union Space programme for the provision of secure satellite 
communications.
The secure SATCOM market is impacted by the global SATCOM technology trends. 
The deployment of HTS/VHTS (Very High Throughput Satellites/Systems) and the 
deployment of NGSO constellations contribute to significantly increasing the volume 
of capacity available. This additional capacity will lead to more cost-effective solutions 
for end-users. Among key technical factors, the development of multi-orbit/multi-band 
terminals could facilitate further the adoption of secure SATCOM by end-users. Secure 
SATCOM systems need also to be protected against different types of threats (such as 
cyberattacks) to guarantee a reliable service.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 8
THE EU SPACE PROGRAMME
THE EU SPACE PROGRAMME 
OVERVIEW OF THE EU SPACE PROGRAMME 9
GOVSATCOM 11
IRIS2 13
SYNERGIES WITH EU SPACE PROGRAMME 17
Chapter Summary
This chapter introduces the EU Space Programme and its various components in 
the four major domains: Navigation, Earth Observation, Satellite Communications 
and Space Situational Awareness. It shows how these components aim to meet the 
European needs and challenges in different areas, such as the economy, climate, and 
security. This chapter helps to understand the current and future prospects of EU Space 
Programme and its impact on Europe and its economy. The chapter covers the following 
topics:
• Three operational pillars of the EU Space Programme: Galileo & EGNOS (European 
Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service), Copernicus and SSA (Space Situational 
Awareness). It describes their benefits, challenges, and importance for monitoring 
and protecting the space environment.
• The GOVSATCOM programme component, which is dedicated to providing secure 
and cost-effective satellite communication services for governmental users, 
via pooling and sharing of existing space assets. It outlines its objective, scope, 
governance, users, and system elements.
• IRIS2 system will boost EU satellite-based connectivity, establishing the Union Secure 
Connectivity  programme.  It will  ensure  reliable, secure and  cost-effective  global 
satellite  communication services  to government  authorised  users as well enable 
services to commercial users with the aim to  remove  communication dead 
zones and foster European competitiveness and societal progress.
• The synergies between the different components of the EU Space Programme and 
how they can enable innovative and integrated solutions for various applications.
© EUSPA
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 9
THE EU SPACE PROGRAMME
Overview of the European Union Space Programme
The European Union Space Programme aligns with Europe’s core priorities. It contributes to achieving the European Green Deal’s climate neutrality goals, advances renewable energy, 
and promotes a circular economy. The EU’s commitment to innovation, resource efficiency, and resilience supports the digital transition, enhances competitiveness, and reinforces Europe’s 
global standing(1).
(1) European Commission, 2022. EU Legislative Priorities for 2023 and 2024: Joint Declaration of the European Parliament,
the Council of the European Union and the European Commission.
(2) European Commission, 2022. Eu Space Programme Overview. 
OVERVIEW OF THE EU SPACE PROGRAMME
EU Space Programme Overview(2)
The EU Space Programme embodies a multi-dimensional approach with three pivotal 
missions: Earth Observation, Navigation, and Protection and Secure Communication. It is 
composed of five integral components:
• Through Copernicus, it empowers comprehensive Earth Observation, and monitoring 
based on satellite and non-space data for environmental and societal benefits, making it 
the world’s foremost provider of space data and information. 
• Galileo is the European Global Satellite Navigation and Positioning System (GNSS), 
enhancing satellite positioning and navigation accuracy. 
• EGNOS enhances satellite positioning and navigation accuracy by enabling GNSS signals 
for safety-of-life applications in aviation.
• Protection and Secure Communication are bolstered by the GOVSATCOM component 
delivering secure satellite communication services to EU authorised actors and delivers 
rapid support over crisis areas.
• The Space Situational Awareness initiative strides the European Union forward in 
comprehending and navigating the complex celestial environment, bolstering the EU’s 
ability to monitor and ensure the safety and sustainability of space activities.
In addition to those five components, the IRIS² initiative has been recently added to 
complement the secured SATCOM component of the EU Space Programme. It aims to 
offer secure, reliable and cost-effective satellite communication services for authorized 
government users, and commercial services
3 missions
Earth Observation Navigation Protection and Secure 
Communication
5 programme components + IRIS2
Copernicus
Earth Observation (EO) 
and monitoring based on 
satellite and non-space data
Galileo
Global satellite navigation 
and positioning system 
(GNSS)
GOVSATCOM
Secure satellite 
communications
for EU security 
actors
EGNOS
Enables the use of GNSS 
signals for safety
of life applications
in aviation
SSA
Space situational 
awareness monitoring
and protecting space
assets
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 10
THE EU SPACE PROGRAMME
SATCOM types and definitions(1) 
SECURE SATCOM (Secure Satellite Communications)
Secure SATCOM is defined as satellite-based, one or two-way communication capacity/service that is able to provide reliable, accessible and guaranteed satellite capacity/service for 
communications. 
It can be provided with any type of frequency band, by GOVSATCOM, COMSATCOM, MILSATCOM players. 
GOVSATCOM
GOVSATCOM 
(Government Satellite Communications)
MILSATCOM 
(Military Satellite Communications)
COMSATCOM 
(Commercial Satellite Communications)
GOVSATCOM are highly assured SATCOM offering a certain 
robust security level with some resilience. GOVSATCOM 
systems are generally considered less protected than 
MILSATCOM systems, but offer a higher degree of 
protection with respect to COMSATCOM systems.
GOVSATCOM encompasses the communication services 
specifically tailored to meet the needs of governmental 
entities, as defined in the working document of the European 
External Action Service of 15/03/2017(2). This involves the 
deployment of satellite communication systems to ensure 
reliable, secure, and resilient communication for government 
operations, including defence emergency response, public 
safety, and diplomatic communication.
MILSATCOM is a highly protected and guaranteed SATCOM, 
offer, generally provided by military systems, offering 
highly assured and protected satellite communication 
capacity, both in terms of nuclear hardening, anti-jamming/
dazzle capacity and highly secure Telemetry, Tracking, and 
Command (TT&C), supplemented by an equally robust and 
resilient ground segment. The security and technology 
are highly specific and largely sovereign in nature. Those 
MILSATCOM systems are primarily designed for military 
purposes and are under national control.
COMSATCOM refers to SATCOM capacity and service 
provided on the global open market, generally with a 
degree of ‘on-demand’ access. These services encompass 
a wide range of sectors, including telecommunications, 
broadcasting, internet access, maritime communication, 
aviation, and more. 
COMSATCOM systems contribute to global connectivity 
and information dissemination.
These diverse categories of SATCOM collectively form a holistic satellite communication ecosystem, where secure, governmental, military, and commercial functionalities synergistically 
meet to address communication requirements across various domains. Public authorities, including military forces, have harnessed satellite communications from both publicly owned 
satellites and market-procured services.
The concept of furnishing satellite communication services for governmental purposes is commonly categorized into three tiers, each representing distinct levels of information assurance, 
although the precise definitions of these tiers may slightly differ. Progressing from commercial SATCOM to MILSATCOM signifies an elevated security threshold for the provided SATCOM 
service. This transition embodies an enhancement in security provisions.
(1) SATCOM categories definitions are, together with other notions, provided in Annex 2.
(2) Council of the European Union. 2017. Cover Note: High Level Civil Military User Needs for Governmental Satellite Communications, March 22nd.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 11
GOVSATCOM THE EU SPACE PROGRAMME
Towards the EU GOVSATCOM initiative
In 2013, following the Treaty of Lisbon's establishment of the EU Space Policy, as a shared 
competence between the EU and Member States, the European Council endorsed the 
preparation for the next generation of GOVSATCOM through collaboration among Member 
States, the Commission, the European Space Agency (ESA), and the European External Action 
Service (EEAS). Addressing the need for secure European space capabilities, the 2016 EU 
Global Strategy emphasized integrated conflict and crisis approaches, recognizing the critical 
role of satellite communications in defence, security, humanitarian aid, and emergencies. 
The GOVSATCOM programme component aims to support the establishment of cutting-edge, 
secure satellite communication capabilities for governmental and security-related applications. 
This includes tailoring cost-effective solutions, enhancing market communication, and driving 
the growth of a competitive, innovative downstream industry. In particular, it will nurture 
innovation, entrepreneurship, and start-ups in line with its mission to boost technological 
autonomy, reinforce security, and foster a vibrant EU space ecosystem.
Objective of the EU GOVSATCOM programme
The GOVSATCOM program aims to achieve three primary objectives(1):
• Consolidate capacities, services, and users for better geographical coverage and 
efficiency, capitalizing on civil-military synergies, and minimizing duplication.
• Enhance the European Union’s strategic capacity for civil protection and humanitarian 
actions both within Europe and globally. 
• Establish cost-effective solutions that ensure secure and readily available communication 
tools for EU governmental security and defence entities. 
Secure SATCOM builds upon the groundwork set by the GOVSATCOM initiative by utilising 
its established framework, infrastructure, and principles to offer enhanced and reliable 
secure communication solutions.
EU GOVSATCOM programme
GOVSATCOM users 
GOVSATCOM users include Union or Member State public authorities as well as authorized 
individuals which are entrusted with tasks relating to the supervision and management 
of emergency and security-critical missions, operations and infrastructures (Art. 65 of the 
EU Space Regulation(1)). They require reliable, remote communication for emergencies or 
disrupted situations. GOVSATCOM will provide both military and civilian responders with 
the following usage(2):
• Crisis Management: 
• Guaranteed communication services facilitating audio/video interaction.
• Data exchange between teams in the field, with their rear bases and with their 
command & control centres.
• Border and Maritime Surveillance: 
• Near real-time distribution of sensitive information from surveillance platforms and 
sensors to border and maritime surveillance agencies.
• Connectivity between EU authorities, national authorities and mobile patrols.
• Key Infrastructure Management: 
• EU Member States’ diplomatic networks with an access to reliable and secure SATCOM 
independent from the hosting state, anywhere in the world.
• Key infrastructure managers with appropriate communication services when these 
are critical to their activities.
GOVSATCOM is also expected to be a key enabler for the implementation of security-related 
services in the Polar regions, the operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS)/
communication with their onboard sensors and Machine-to-Machine communications for 
applications where security is at stake.
(1) Regulation (EU) 2021/696 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 April 2021 establishing the Union Space Programme and the European Union Agency for the Space Programme
(2) European Commission, DG DEFIS. 2021. GOVSATCOM Overview.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 12
GOVSATCOM THE EU SPACE PROGRAMME
GOVSATCOM Hub and EUSPA
Security constitutes a significant facet within the GOVSATCOM Hub. The proposed long-term solution for the GOVSATCOM infrastructure prioritises robustness and relevant technology 
to meet stringent security requirements. This infrastructure acts as the operational interface, seamlessly connecting GOVSATCOM users with providers of secured satellite communication 
capacity and services. This Hub not only manages resource planning but also supports vigilant security monitoring. Its crucial role encompasses accessing resources from diverse national 
and commercial SATCOM sources, each possessing unique proprietary interfaces and varying security levels. This approach ensures that security considerations are integral to resource 
procurement and compliance with applicable provisions.
Focus on GOVSATCOM Hub(1)
GOVSATCOM services will be accessible through a Hub, which will connect users with 
providers, optimizing the available resources and guaranteeing access, even in unpredictable 
situations. The recent Implementing Act issued in May 2023 outlines the GOVSATCOM Hubs’ 
functionalities and operational aspects(2). This EU-owned Hub will incorporate all central 
functions to organise and manage demand and supply, and implement standardisation, 
security and governance. While aggregating the users’ demands, it will combine and link 
different satellite and ground infrastructure capacities into a system-of-systems approach. 
Based on redundant systems located in secured and protected sites, the GOVSATCOM Hub 
will be in charge of monitoring and ensuring the overall capacity and service planning as 
well as the security of the overall system.
The GOVSATCOM Hub(1)
EUSPA is preparing the design and the development of the infrastructure for the 
GOVSATCOM Hub through a multi-stage procurement process, and, depending on the 
availability of a hosting facility – will proceed with its operational deployment and with an 
upgrade for scalability and connectivity purposes.
EUSPA is also in charge of the coordination of the GOVSATCOM network of users, with 
the aim to voice the user perspective and regularly assess the market trends and associated 
demand. EUSPA has been leading the ENTRUSTED initiative, which aimed to:
• Set-up a network of governmental users of secure satellite communication services.
• Foster exchange of experience, developing know-how and creating training and 
awareness content material.
• Establish a consolidated and prioritized set of user requirements across the addressed 
use cases.
• Create a long-term roadmap and coordination plan for Research & Innovation activities in 
the domain of user technologies.
• Prepare for the uptake of secure GOVSATCOM services.
(1) European Commission, DG DEFIS. 2021. Factsheet “How it works”, April 27th.
(2) Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2023/1053 of 30 May 2023 laying down rules for the application of Regulation (EU) 
2023/588 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards operational requirements for governmental services provided 
under Union Secure Connectivity Programme and its service portfolio.
Transmission
Operational
MS-public/private
Operator
USER
Monitor
& ensure
security
Service
planning
interfaces
Capacity
planning
interfaces
Secure GOVSATCOM Hub in operation
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 13
IRIS THE EU SPACE PROGRAMME 2
IRIS2 system will boost EU satellite-based connectivity
IRIS2 background
The EU socio-economic standards are adapting to digital transformation amidst rising 
geopolitical and cybersecurity challenges. Global satellite communication coverage 
represents a strategic infrastructure with dual-use implications. In the EU’s satellite 
communication sector, a landscape characterised by robust competition prevails, as global 
operators deploy expansive satellite constellations to cater to consumer connectivity 
demands. Additionally, both Russia and China have unveiled government-backed initiatives 
for worldwide space infrastructure, aligned with a diverse range of strategic connectivity 
goals. Within this context: 
• The President of the European Commission (EC) emphasized secure connectivity in her 
2020 State of the Union. The October 2020 European Council conclusions urged digital 
sovereignty and industrial alliances, including for secure networks(1).
• In 2021, a study by a consortium of prominent European space and connectivity players 
assessed investment options for a new secure, sovereign satellite connectivity system. 
This system aims also to bolster the EU‘s existing GNSS and Earth observation capacity.
• Following the Proposal for a regulation released by the European Commission in 2018, 
the formal initiative to establish an EU governmental satellite communications capability 
was approved through Regulation 2021/696(2) and funded under the 2021 – 2027 
Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF). This legal framework sets common rules to 
all the components of the Space programme, including Galileo, EGNOS, Copernicus, 
GOVSATCOM and SST, setting out certain rules that are specific to each of these 
components.
A Call for Tender was issued by the EC in 2021, entitled New Space solutions for longterm availability of reliable, secure, cost-effective, and space-based connectivity(3). The 
objective was to support the definition of the system architecture of an innovative EU 
space-based global secure connectivity system.
On the 15th of February 2022, the European Commission proposed a Regulation 
of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the Union Secure 
Connectivity programme for the period 2023 – 2027(4), with the objective to develop 
a sovereign  secure  space-based connectivity system for the provision of satellite 
communication services to governmental and commercial users. 
On the 20th of March 2023, the Regulation (EU) 2023/588 entered into force, 
establishing the Union Secure Connectivity programme for the period. As described 
in the regulation, the general objectives of the Secure Connectivity Programme are to:
• Ensure secure, autonomous, high-quality, reliable & cost-effective satellite 
governmental communication services to government authorised users.
• Enable commercial services, or services offered to government-authorised users 
based on commercial infrastructure at market conditions.
(1) European Commission, 2021. Inception Impact Assessment for the Establishment of an EU Space-based Global Secure Connectivity System.
(2) Regulation (EU) 2021/696 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 April 2021 establishing the Union Space Programme and the European Union Agency for the Space Programme. 
(3) European Commission, 2021. New Space Solutions for Long-term Availability of Reliable, Secure, Cost Effective Space Based Connectivity 2021/S 137-363804 Contract notice Services.
(4) European Commission, 2022. Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the Union Secure Connectivity programme for the period 2023–2027.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 14
THE EU SPACE PROGRAMME
IRIS2 and GOVSATCOM
The release of the Regulation (EU) 2023/588, establishing the Union Secure Connectivity programme for the period 2023–2027(1), describes the relationship between GOVSATCOM 
programme and IRIS2:
• The provision of the IRIS2 governmental services shall complement and integrate the GOVSATCOM component into the secure connectivity system.
• IRIS2 shall complement and integrate the existing and future capacities used in the framework of the GOVSATCOM component including the GOVSATCOM ground segment infrastructure, 
which is to be scaled up, in particular the GOVSATCOM Hub.
• IRIS² and GOVSATCOM capacities and services listed in the service portfolio, would be jointly pooled and shared through the GOVSATCOM Hub.
GOVSATCOM services
The GOVSATCOM service portfolio shall consist of the following categories 
of communication services(2):
• end-to-end services, allowing the user to connect to a network capable 
to provide services.
• anchored capacity services, allowing the user to use satellite capacity and 
associated anchoring station facility. 
• raw capacity services, allowing the user to use satellite capacity 
(bandwidth).
The GOVSATCOM services shall be provided through the GOVSATCOM hub 
infrastructure. Definition of GOVSATCOM services is complemented by the 
Sharing and Prioritisation Implementation Act(3). 
IRIS2 services
The system implementing the Union Secure Connectivity Programme shall be 
designed to provide or enable the following satellite communications services:
• The following services offered to governmental users based on the 
governmental infrastructure:
• Service #1: Robust Worldwide Low-latency Service.
• Service #2: Space Data Relay.
• The following services offered to governmental users based on the 
commercial infrastructure:
• Service #3: Assured Worldwide Low-latency Service.
• Service #4: Assured Worldwide Narrowband Service.
(1) Regulation (EU) 2023/588 of the European Parliament and of the Council of the 15th of March 2023, establishing the Union Secure Connectivity programme for the period 2023-2027.
(2) Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2023/1054 of 30 May 2023 laying down rules for the application of Regulation (EU) 2021/696 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the service portfolio for the Governmental Satellite Communications 
services offered by the system established under the Union Space Programme.
(3) Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2023/1055 of 30 May 2023 setting out the rules on the sharing and prioritisation of satellite communication capacities, services, and user equipment to fulfil the function referred to in Article 66(2) of Regulation (EU) 2021/696 
of the European Parliament and of the Council
IRIS2
IRIS2 will complement and expand the GOVSATCOM service portfolio
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 15
IRIS THE EU SPACE PROGRAMME 2
IRIS2 missions & use cases: guarantee provision of secure SATCOM services
A reliable, secure and cost-effective governmental communication service
Surveillance Allow Mass-Market Service Encryption Capability
Mobile Broadband
Fixed Broadband
Satellite Trunking for B2B (Business to 
Business) services
Satellite access for transportation – for 
ships, airplanes, drones, connectedcars
Reinforcement of terrestrial networks 
(resilience) – asanalternative incases
of disruptive events
Cloudbased services
Government and institutional users
Data centres
Satellite communication networks
Terrestrial communication networks
Banking industries
Other industries
Connecting key
infrastructures
Crisis Management
and external actions
IRIS² is designed to enhance governmental communication services, ensuring reliability, 
security, and cost-effectiveness through a comprehensive set of use cases. Among these, 
this report primarily focuses on three pivotal categories: connecting key infrastructures, 
crisis management and external actions, as well as surveillance. 
Additionally, the program addresses commercialization aspects, including a mass-market 
service, and gradually integrate EuroQCI (Quantum Communication Infrastructure) for 
encryption capabilities. This innovative initiative bridges critical infrastructures, facilitates 
strategic crisis responses, extends connectivity to key regions, and empowers secure 
communication, heralding an era of comprehensive and adaptable governmental 
communication solutions(1).
IRIS2 Infrastructure
The IRIS2 infrastructure shall comprise a multi-orbit constellation system. The IRIS2 infrastructure will be composed of two components to serve both governmental and commercial services(2):
• Governmental infrastructure, called “hard gov”, (whose assets would be owned by European Union) dedicated to deliver strengthened governmental services.
• Commercial infrastructure, called “light gov”, (not owned by the European Union) able to provide services to governmental users and commercial services.
(1) European Union, 2023. Factsheet: Iris²: Infrastructure for Resilience, Interconnectivity and Security by Satellite, March.
(2) European Commission, 2023. IRIS² Industry Information Day, March 30th. © Unsplash © Unsplash
© Unsplash
© Unsplash
© Unsplash
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 16
THE EU SPACE PROGRAMME
IRIS2 SATCOM market analysis
The table below presents the positioning between IRIS2 with respect to a selection of GEO/NGSO constellation systems. The list of GEO/NGSO constellation systems is not exhaustive and mainly 
focus on NGSO high-throughput for FSS systems. It is also worth mentioning that the position of the GEO/NGSO systems in each box does not illustrate a potential ranking. IRIS2 is a multi-orbit 
constellation (LEO, MEO, GEO) able to serve COMSATCOM, GOVSATCOM and MILSATCOM market segments. IRIS2 will be able to fill the gap that space powers are pursuing.
GEO
Limited latitudes / 
Restricted longitude
High latency
MEO
Limited latitudes (for Equatorial)
Full longitude coverage
Medium latency
LEO
Global coverage
Low latency
GEO + MEO + LEO
MILSATCOM GOVSATCOM ComSATCOM
SATCOMbw
Sicral
WGS
Syracuse
Govsat
Athena-Fidus
Spainsat
SES(2)
OneWeb
Space X
Space X
OneWeb
Starlink
Starshield
Sfera
SES
Hispasat(2)
O3b mPOWER
+ others non EU players(2)
(Inmarsat, Telenor, Intelsat.) 
Eutelsat(2)
The European 
Commission will 
consider military needs 
and requirements when 
defining the service 
portfolio of IRIS²(1)
Hardgov services
Lightgov services
Commercial services
Telesat
Amazon
Lightspeed
Kuiper
Iridium
HellasSat(2)
Iridium NEXT
Guowang
SDA’s Transport Layer
GreeCom
XTAR-EUR
(1) European Commission, 2023. European Union Space Strategy for Security and Defence, March 10th
(2) For those satellite operators, we mean that satellite fleet can be used to provide satellite communications services.
White box: satellite operator 
Purple box: GEO/NGSO system
Dark blue box: IRIS2
IRIS2
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 17
THE EU SPACE PROGRAMME
Synergies between the different components 
of the EU Space Programme 
The establishment of EU Space Programme not only enhances the synergies combining various EU space components data and services, the potential for governmental users becomes 
even more significant, as it amplifies their diverse components of the EU Space Programme but also reinforces the collective impact at both system and user level capability to revolutionize daily operations and processes. This convergence of Secure Satellite Communications with Navigation and Earth Observation services and data empowers applications, making 
them more contextually relevant and profoundly transformative.
The upcoming pages demonstrate a selected array of applications that provide a glimpse into how the constituent parts of the EU Space Programme, coupled with their corresponding data 
and services, can collaboratively empower these endeavours.
Smart emergency response vehicles serve as a critical asset for first responders, such as civil protection, ambulance services, and fire & rescue teams. 
The application integrates SATCOM to establish seamless connectivity for emergency response vehicles. Additionally, SATCOM becomes imperative when terrestrial networks are unavailable. SATCOM technology enables real-time monitoring of 
emergency operations, fostering effective communication among response teams and coordination centres. 
Earth Observation plays a crucial role in updating maps of affected areas. When incidents cause infrastructure damage, 
such as collapsed bridges or inaccessible roadways, EO data provides accurate and up-to-date information for informed 
decision-making and navigation.
Advanced GNSS technology equips these vehicles with precise positioning and navigation capabilities. This dual-purpose 
feature enhances emergency response efficiency by ensuring accurate route guidance. GNSS facilitates fleet tracking and 
management functionalities, optimizing resource allocation and coordination efforts.
Management of refugee camps focuses on the efficient administration of refugee camps, providing essential humanitarian 
support to displaced populations.
SATCOM technology empowers refugee camps with resilient broadband connectivity. This robust connectivity facilitates 
access to substantial data volumes, enabling camp administrators to efficiently share information.
Earth Observation data is harnessed to optimise camp management. It assists in planning camp layouts and distributing 
essential resources like wells and medicine. By displaying settlement concentrations and estimating population density 
across different areas of a camp, EO supports informed decision-making for resource allocation.
SYNERGIES WITH EU SPACE PROGRAMME
© Pixabay © Pixabay
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 18
THE EU SPACE PROGRAMME
Synergies between the different components 
of the EU Space Programme (continued)
Coordination of Health, Medicine Response, and WASH (Water, Sanitation and Hygiene) Actions addresses the coordination of health, medical responses, and Water, Sanitation and Hygiene initiatives during disasters.
SATCOM ensures consistent and reliable communication for telemedicine and telehealth services. By utilising two-way 
telecommunications technology, healthcare expertise can be shared remotely through multimedia and computer networks. 
Earth Observation contributes by providing detailed maps of affected areas, including post-event effects. It also allows 
population counting.
Law Enforcement Assets Monitoring focuses on the management of fleets of ships, vehicles and aircrafts utilised by law 
enforcement and emergency services to enhance reactivity. 
SATCOM is integrated with terrestrial networks and gap filler technologies. This combination establishes communication 
links between transports and central information centres. 
Earth Observation data offers general weather information (especially when ships and aircraft are used) and infrastructure 
status, helping to mitigate risks of accidents and minimize impact, especially in emergency management scenarios.
GNSS is utilised for outdoor location services. These systems, combined with indoor technologies, expand location services 
into tunnels and ensure continuous and available positioning.
Maritime Surveillance and Ship Detection centres: creation of a comprehensive situational overview for maritime 
surveillance. It involves the integration of data from diverse sources, including coastal stations, satellite imagery, specialized aircraft, and patrol vessels. 
SATCOM technology addresses challenges in joint operations that arise from non-interoperable communication systems. 
Secure SATCOM specially allows to exchange images and videos among different types of assets (surveillance aircraft, patrolling vessels, and command centres), providing a solution to communication issues with standardised and inter-operable 
communications means.
Maritime surveillance utilises both EO components, radar and optical imagery for monitoring activities and ship detection. 
Spaceborne Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) is particularly valuable due to its ability to image day and night, and through 
cloud cover; and to identify ships (including those not utilising the AIS, Automatic Identification System).
GNSS plays a vital role in precise tracking and monitoring of maritime activities, aiding in the effective management of 
shipping lanes and maritime borders.
SYNERGIES WITH EU SPACE PROGRAMME
© AdobeStock © AdobeStock © Pixabay
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 19
THE EU SPACE PROGRAMME
Synergies between the different components 
of the EU Space Programme (continued)
Reduction of Illegal Poaching of Protected Wildlife Species targets the mitigation of wildlife trafficking, encompassing 
the illicit trade, poaching, and collection of endangered species. 
SATCOM enables the collection of data collected from distributed sensors, and networks, allowing to identify suspicious 
activities in sensitive areas. AI-enhanced camera networks (AI– Artificial Intelligence), connected via SATCOM to operations 
centres, facilitate real-time monitoring of parks and reserves. This enables rapid detection of potential illegal activities, 
allowing law enforcement to initiate countermeasure swiftly.
Earth Observation data, coupled with AI tools, has proven an invaluable tool for authorities combatting wildlife trafficking. 
Satellite imaging with AI enhancements serves as an effective method for tracking protected species, aiding in law enforcement 
efforts.
GNSS-enabled telemetry from animal collars contributes to species preservation. These collars, equipped with GNSS 
receivers, data communication radio-modems and VHF (Very High Frequency) transmitters, allow authorities to monitor 
and protect wildlife populations. 
RECOMMENDED READ: EUSPA’s EO and GNSS Market Report
EUSPA offers a collection of informative reports, available for download through the following link. The most recent 
addition to this series is the EO / GNSS report. The present secure SATCOM report marks a significant milestone as the first 
comprehensive exploration of this thematic area. With this addition, EUSPA comprehensively covers several components 
of the EU space programme (GNSS, Earth Observation and now also Secure Satellite Communications).
The EUSPA EO and GNSS market report is a comprehensive source of knowledge and information on the dynamic, global 
EO & GNSS markets. The report is published every two years, with the latest edition released in 2022. The report maintains 
a consistent structure while evolving from previous editions. Through the merger of EO and GNSS, the report offers insights 
into 15+ distinct market segments.
The report begins with an overview of the EO and GNSS market, touching on trends, size, and revenues. It delves into 
Copernicus and EGNSS, their global role, and policy trends. The core of the report consists of market segments, each 
following a uniform structure. This issue‘s Editor‘s Special highlights ‚Innovative Solutions for Health,‘ showcasing EO and 
GNSS‘s potential in mitigating global health challenges. 
The next issue of the EO and GNSS Market report, will be published in 2024. Visit https://www.euspa.europa.eu/europeanspace/euspace-market/gnss-market/eo-gnss-market-report to download the most-up-to-date issue of the Report.
SYNERGIES WITH EU SPACE PROGRAMME
60.921904N 
20.712817E
60.990011N 
20.680237E
60.993253N 
20.453340E
2022 / ISSUE 1
EUSPA 
EO and GNSS
Market Report
Innovative Solutions for Health
EDITOR’S SPECIAL
© Pixabay
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 20
THE EU SPACE PROGRAMME
© Unsplash
SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
Chapter Summary
After presenting the different components of the EU Space Programme, paying particular 
attention to GOVSATCOM and IRIS2, this chapter elaborates on the forecasted demand 
for secure SATCOM services and their drivers. With this aim, the chapter describes how 
secure SATCOM networks are designed and operated, as well as the main providers 
and business models associated to these services. The current and future needs of the 
concerned users and use cases for secure SATCOM are described, as well as the key 
performance parameters and requirements for the envisaged secure SATCOM capacity 
demand. The chapter covers the following topics:
• A brief overview of the overall SATCOM market value and the drivers that are 
shaping the industry, creating opportunities and challenges for different services and 
applications. Such trends for SATCOM market value are also applicable to secure 
SATCOM market. 
• A deep dive into the secure SATCOM market, in terms of main service provision 
stakeholders, value chain, business model options and factor influencing the market 
dynamics.
• The secure SATCOM use cases in the European Union alongside the driving elements 
and barriers/inhibitors that affect the demand amongst the user groups. 
• The forecasted secure SATCOM capacity demand over the 2025 – 2040 period.
USE CASES PRESENTATION 21
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM DEMAND 23
SECURE SATCOM DEMAND PER KPP 37
USE CASES PRESENTATION 41
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 21
USE CASES PRESENTATION SECURE SATCOM MARKET DEMAND
Key SATCOM market trends
Satellite Communications are widely used in a variety of applications, ranging from consumer 
TV broadcasting, maritime and plane communications, to governmental and even military 
use cases. The sum of all those uses represents the overall SATCOM market. Within this 
envelope, the secure SATCOM market is intended as the market related to three distinct use 
case categories (i.e. Surveillance, Crisis Management and Key Infrastructure, cf. page 30).
The secure SATCOM market is quite strategic even though it represents just a fraction of the 
overall SATCOM market. It is expected to be influenced by similar trends. Furthermore, the 
overall SATCOM market is conventionally split into two distinct categories: video and data. 
Video encompasses distribution of TV channels by satellites and professional exchanges 
of video content. The Data category comprises several service types, including Consumer 
Broadband, Enterprise Networks, Maritime, Aero, Cellular Backhaul & Trunking and 
MILSATCOM. The QoS (Quality of Service) would – among other parameters - be different 
from one service to another. The present report will first offer an overview of the overall 
SATCOM market, along with its economic quantification in terms of revenues (projected up 
to 2031). Subsequently, its ’’secure’’ portion is characterised in terms of capacity demand 
(Mbps), spanning the period 2025 – 2040, as illustrated on page 35. 
The SATCOM industry has continued and accelerated its deep transformation in the 
2022’s increasingly competitive environment. The revenue from video capacity has been 
decreasing, while data revenue is on an upward trend (see next page). The move from video 
to data is highlighted by the decline of GEO Regular satellite (mainly used for video) and 
increase of GEO-HTS/NGSO-HTS (mainly used for data) (cf. definition of regular and HTS 
in Annex 2).
The pie chart on the right presents the revenues per capacity type (GEO-Regular, GEO-HTS 
and NGSO-HTS) in 2021 and a projection in 2031. The rapidly growing importance of NGSO 
in connectivity markets is impacting the overall SATCOM industry with an in-creasing 
number of players looking at a multi-orbit strategy to expand their business. Over the last 
two years, significant developments have unfolded in the NGSO sector, encompassing new 
constellation orders, the commencement of Starlink services, the Eutelsat’s combination of 
activities with OneWeb, and the full deployment of OneWeb’s 1st generation satellites. For 
the coming years, it is noteworthy to mention the planned entry of service of O3b mPOWER 
by the end 2023 and the services of Telesat Lightspeed scheduled to begin in late 2027. 
The growth of overall SATCOM revenue is mainly driven by NGSO constellation with a move 
from 328M€ (2021) to 10 478M€ (2031).
Such trend would also impact secure SATCOM Market. Consequently, NGSO constellation 
are assessed to be also from a market value point of view- the major growth driver for 
secure SATCOM.
Revenue breakdown by capacity type, million €, 2021 (1)(2)
9 26 M€
NGSO-HTS 328 M€
GEO-HTS 2.584 M€
GEO-Regular 6.350 M€
NGSO-HTS 10.478 M€
GEO-HTS 6.614 M€
GEO-Regular 3.235 M€
Revenue breakdown by capacity type, million €, 2031 (1)(2)
20 328 M€
(1) “Satellite Connectivity and Video Market, 29th Edition, Euroconsult” © Euroconsult
(2) Original data is in U.S.$. Converted in €, using a conversion rate of 1,10$/€ (average value from European Central Bank over July 2023)
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 22
USE CASES PRESENTATION SECURE SATCOM MARKET DEMAND
SATCOM market growth is driven by services & data 
The introduction of cost-effective systems (such as HTS (High Throughput Satellites) 
payloads, NGSO constellations) and a fiercely competitive market have contributed 
to changes in strategies, with operators pushed to look for extra revenues to avoid the 
commodity price trap. Operators have increasingly set their sights on a new revenue stream: 
services. The latter have been on a downward trend since 2017, mainly due to the negative 
impact of video services and the impact of COVID-19 in 2020-21 on mobility markets. 
However, FSS service revenues are poised to experience a resurgence in growth which in 
2022. Revenues are projected to escalate from €98.5 billion to €112.4 billion between 2021 
and 2031, culminating in cumulative earnings of €1.1 trillion over the decade.
The decline in capacity demand for video services is expected to persist, primarily affecting 
mature TV markets. On the other hand, all data markets, are projected to experience 
substantial growth. Among others, direct-to-device (D2D) data revenues are also estimated 
to grow, but is not included in our market value assessment. The data services are expected 
to grow from €14.8 billion in 2021 to €46.7 billion in 2031 (10-year CAGR: 12%), with 
all data segments contributing to revenue growth by 2031. Overall, the share of data 
applications is set to jump from 15% of total service revenues in 2021 to 42% by 2031. 
Drivers will include growth in subscribers/sites and ARPUs (Average Revenue Per User, the 
amount of money received from each user on average), supported by the improving abilities 
of satellite technology to support higher quality broadband connectivity. Additional factors 
contributing to this trend will involve the expansion of communication demands driven by 
data-intensive applications, alongside broader movements aimed at achieving universal 
access and closing the digital divide. Furthermore, the utilization of satellite connectivity for 
mobile applications plays a role in this trajectory.
Capacity revenues will follow a similar trend as service revenues for both data and video 
segments. On the data side, capacity revenues is estimated to be multiplied by four to more 
than €17.4 billion in 2031. Further drops in the pricing levels are expected with the entry 
into service of new VHTS (Very High Throughput Satellites) and NGSO constellations, 
which is estimated to drive demand for data services and contribute to revenue growth.
Data and services would create value for secure SATCOM
Service (and not capacity) and data are also estimated to be the growth driver – from a 
market value point of view – for secure SATCOM.
Revenues for Data segments, billion € (2021 – 2031) (1)(2)
Revenues for Video segments, billion € (2021 – 2031) (1)(2)
Capacity revenue
Service revenue
Capacity revenue
Service revenue
2021
2021
2031
2031
4.4B€
4.8B€
17.4B€
3B€
14.8B€
83.7B€
46.7B€
65.7B€
(1) “Satellite Connectivity and Video Market, 29th Edition, Euroconsult” © Euroconsult
(2) Conversion rate of 1,10$/€ (average value from European Central Bank over July 2023)
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 23
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM DEMAND SECURE SATCOM MARKET DEMAND
Focus on secure SATCOM
From now onwards, the report will specifically focus on the secure SATCOM market, in 
terms of secure satellite connectivity value chain, service provision, business models, users, 
use cases and forecasted secure SATCOM capacity demand, over the 2025 – 2040 period.
Each use case is presented individually, focusing on the actors, the connected units and their 
use of secure SATCOM, the dynamics and drivers of the use case’ demand and the required 
geographical coverage as well.
Regarding the secure SATCOM capacity demand forecast, the analysis mainly focuses on 
FSS, as the vast majority of the satellite capacity demand arises from FSS. In addition, the 
analysis is provided over the 2025 – 2040 period, characterising the demand through Key 
Performance Parameters (KPP). A set of 5 Key Performance Parameters are introduced to 
identify future demand patterns across the estimated demand, regarding, for instance, the 
latency or the geographical coverage.
© Unsplash
© Unsplash
© EUSPA
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 24
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM DEMAND SECURE SATCOM MARKET DEMAND
Typical System Architecture
Organisation of a satellite communication network structure
To establish a SATCOM link between two or multiple users and/or user networks, three 
essential components are necessary for both SATCOM and secure SATCOM, in conjunction 
with transmission networks. The figure provides a schematic representation of these distinct 
elements (more in-depth technical insights are given in section secure SATCOM technology, 
from page 80).
Space segment: A satellite (or a set of satellites for constellation) with different existing 
designs. Satellites can operate in different orbits and be part of different constellation 
concepts. Satellites are composed of a platform (also called bus) and one or several payloads. 
The payload(s) is/are really tailored to the mission(s) of the system. Space segment is 
manufactured by satellite manufacturers, purchased and operated by satellite operators.
Ground segment: It consists of all the ground-based elements of a space-based system 
required to operate the satellite(s) and distribute the payload(s) data among interested 
parties on the ground, via a dedicated network.
Ground segment is mainly made of several ground stations, called Hub or gateway. Those 
ground stations can be grouped in a ground site called teleport.
User segment: User segment is made of various satellite communication terminals that 
usually support voice and data transmissions (both in reception and transmission). The 
user terminal includes the RF (Radio Frequency) equipment and the modem as well as 
the interfaces to the user networks and the user himself. It also includes the management 
aspects to sufficiently interact with the overall SATCOM system. The user terminal itself can 
be furnished as part of the SATCOM service or it can be a terminal provided by the enduser. Terminals which are provided by a satellite operator/service provider will generally lock 
the end-user into the SATCOM platform provided by that provider only; whereas a terminal 
provided by an end-user can be used on a wide variety of SATCOM platforms.
However, the space segment, the ground segment and the user segment alone do not 
suffice. Provision of secure SATCOM requires additional entities who design services in 
line with user requirements, define technical requirements to satisfy user needs (aiming at 
an optimized use of the available resources) and assess the economic viability of service 
provision. Such entities are called service providers, and the characteristics of the service 
provision are defined in a contract between the service provider and the end users.
As a result, the provision of SATCOM/secure SATCOM services necessitates a cohesive set 
of actors operating within a value chain structure. Within this framework, the role of each 
entity is precisely delineated. The subsequent page outlines the pivotal contributors in the 
value chain responsible for providing secure SATCOM services. Notably, it is important to 
reiterate that both SATCOM and secure SATCOM share the same satellite communication 
networks and value chain, as highlighted at the beginning of this page.
Mobile user
(usually receive & transmit)
Fixed communication user
(usually receive & transmit)
Space segment
User segment
(Hub/gateway/teleport)
Central anchor station
Ground segment
Fiber
link
Terrestrial Network
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 25
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM DEMAND SECURE SATCOM MARKET DEMAND
• Thales Alenia Space (EU)
• Airbus Defence and Space (EU)
• OHB System (EU)
• SSTL (U.K.)*
• Boeing Satellite Systems (U.S.)*
• Lockheed Martin (U.S.)*
• Maxar Technologies (U.S.)*
• Northrop Grumman Innovations 
System (U.S.)*
• Energia (Russia)*
• ISS Khrunichev (Russia)*
• Mitsubishi (Japan)*
• CAST (China)*
• ISRO (India)*
• TAI (Turkey)*
• IAI (Israel)*
• INVAP (Argentina)*
• SES (EU)
• Eutelsat/OneWeb (EU)
• Hispasat (EU)
• Hellas Sat (EU)
• Ovzon (EU)
• Hisdesat (EU)
• DGA (Délégation Générale de 
l’Armement)
• Italian MoD (Ministry of Defence)
• German MoD
• Telenor (Norway)*
• Avanti (U.K.)*
• Inmarsat (U.K.)*
• Telesat (Canada)*
• Intelsat (U.S.)*
• Viasat (U.S.)*
• Echostar (U.S.)*
• Arabsat (Saudi Arabia)*
• Star One (Brazil)*
• Measat (Malaysia)*
• China Satcom (China)*
• Thales (EU)
• SSC (EU)
• Intellian (U.S.)*
• Hughes (U.S.)*
• Gilat (Israel)*
• ST Engineering (Singapore)*
• Viasat (U.S.)*
• Cobham (U.S.)*
• L3 Harris (U.S.)*
• Kymeta (U.S.)*
• ALL.SPACE (U.K.)
• KSAT (Norway)*
• Airbus CIS (EU)
• Telespazio (EU)
• Marlink (EU)
• IEC Telecom (EU)
• Otesat Maritel (EU)
• ATCO (Airbus Telespazio Capacity 
Operator)(2)
• Speedcast (U.S.)*
• Sagenet (U.S.)*
• Galaxy Broadband (Canada)*
• PSN (Indonesia)*
• Bharti (India)*
• Sencinet (Brazil)*
• Military forces
• Border surveillance authorities
• Maritime community
• Police and Homeland security 
forces
• Civil Protection entities
• Humanitarian aid responders
• Civil and military operators of key 
infrastructure such as:
- Institutional and diplomatic 
networks
- Transport infrastructure (air, rail 
and road)
- Space infrastructure and 
services
The value chain considers the key global players involved in systems manufacturing, satellite integration, 
satellite operations and downstream services creation and distribution. The lists of the presented companies 
is not exhaustive.
* Indicate the companies, whose HQs (Headquarters) are not based in the EU.
(1) Including User Terminal
(2) ATCO is a Joint-Venture between Airbus and Telespazio to provide military communication services using SYRACUSE IV (French military satellite)
Satellite Manufacturer Satellite Operator Ground Segment
Manufacturer (1) Service Providers End Users 
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 26
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM DEMAND SECURE SATCOM MARKET DEMAND
Commercial satellite operators
Established satellite operators, whether operating GEO satellites or NGSO satellites systems, are usually the owners of their ground infrastructure. Each GEO satellite usually has its own 
ground infrastructure. Satellite operators might lease/manage capacity or network solutions (including equipment) either directly to the end consumer or through a service provider. It is 
noteworthy that equipment can be located in a proprietary site or hosted in third-party owned site. 
Examples of European Union companies (1): SES, Eutelsat, Hellas Sat, Hispasat/Hisdesat, Ovzon
Service providers
Service providers link the satellite operators to the end users. Providers exist in a wide variety of forms, ranging from teleport operators to local resellers, and develop value-added services. 
The frontiers between activities are partly blurred because, depending on the market they serve and, on their activities, service providers can operate in SATCOM only or on other domains 
at the same time (Earth observation and Navigation). Some companies own and operate their own ground segment, buying wholesale capacity from satellite operators and tailoring their 
own offering before reselling it to end users. Providers can also deliver services directly to certain customers.
Examples of European Union companies(1): Telespazio, Airbus, Marlink
Type of ownership
A company‘s type of ownership can have an impact on its provided service. For example, a decision can be taken amongst the ownership and the administration of a country to withdraw 
services or to take full control of its facilities in order for a hostile entity not to be able to act and infringe upon the sovereign status of the company. The following three types of ownership 
are observed:
• Privately held company: A registered company that is held in private ownership and is not quoted on a public stock exchange. This type of company is likely to have a reason to change 
in ownership profiles, but a change of ownership could occur without warning.
• Publicly listed company: A publicly listed company is a registered company with shares traded on a public stock exchange. Share can be bought and sold, and there are normally several 
large shareholders controlling the majority of the shares.
• Government owned: An organisation that is government owned or controlled, either as sovereign entity or an Intergovernmental organisation.
Service provision for secure SATCOM services
Secure SATCOM services can be provided by two types of companies: the commercial satellite operators and the service providers. Indeed, commercial satellite operators can also offer 
directly secure SATCOM services to users (cf. page 60 for more details on the vertical integration trend for the satellite operators). 
(1) List is not exhaustive and intends to present a selection of the most relevant companies for the provision of secure SATCOM services.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 27
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM DEMAND SECURE SATCOM MARKET DEMAND
Business models for satellites operators
The GOVSATCOM service portfolio shall consist of three different categories of communication services: end-to-end services (allowing the user to connect to a network capable to provide 
services), anchored capacity services (allowing the user to use satellite capacity and associated anchoring station facility) and raw capacity services (allowing the user to use satellite 
capacity/bandwidth)(1) .
Following the GOVSATCOM service portfolio taxonomy, the following table presents the different items that will compose the provision of the services by a satellite operator (as mentioned 
in the previous page, secure SATCOM services can be provided by satellite operators and service providers). The part of the services that are not included in the red dot line, are provided 
by the service provider(2). 
(1) Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2023/1054 of 30 May 20223 laying down rules for the application of Regulation (EU) 2021/696 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the service portfolio for the Governmental Satellite Communications services 
offered by the system established under the Union Space Programme.
(2) In case of GOVSATCOM service provision, service provider includes also GOVSATCOM participant. Regulation (EU) 2021/696 of the European Parliament and of the council of 28 April 2021 establishing the Union Space Programme and the European Union Agency for the 
Space Programme and repealing Regulations (EU) No 912/2010, (EU) No 1285/2013 and (EU) No 377/2014 and Decision No 541/2014/EU
END-TO-END SERVICES ANCHORED CAPACITY 
SERVICES RAW CAPACITY SERVICES
SATELLITE BANDWITH /
CAPACITY
• Capacity managed by the 
operator/provider from/
to router/switch of anchor 
station
• Raw capacity packaged 
and sold to Service 
Providers or directly to the 
end user
• Raw capacity sold 
(in MHz) to Service 
Providers or directly 
to the end user.
GROUND INFRA
• Owned and managed by 
satellite operator.
• Vendor specific
• Owned and managed by 
satellite operator.
• Maybe co-located with the 
feeder link
• Can be produced or leased 
by third parties
NETWORK OPERATIONS
• Smart routing and network 
optimization managed by 
satellite operator, together 
with the integration with 
terrestrial network
• Routing and integration 
with terrestrial network 
to be arranged with third 
parties
• Smart routing, network 
optimization and 
integration with terrestrial 
network to be arranged 
with third parties
SERVICE PROVISION
• Operator/Provider 
responsible for full 
connectivity service 
integration and 
performance (QoS).
• Includes the provision 
of capacity as well as a 
central anchor station and 
customer support
• Satellite raw capacity only
• A third party Service 
Provider designs the 
desired services (i.e. SLA 
and CIR – Committed 
Information Rate)
Mobile user
(usually
receive
& transmit)
Fixed communication user
(usually receive & transmit)
Central anchor station
(Hub/gateway/teleport)
+ Full-service service integration 
Fiber link Terrestrial Network
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 28
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM DEMAND SECURE SATCOM MARKET DEMAND
Business models for satellites operators (continued)
Historically, the satellite operator industry was structured around fixed prices that were 
applicable to a contract for several years. As such, pricing was often expressed in €/MHz/
year. Since several years ago, pricing contracts have been using Mbps instead of MHz; this 
trend has developed in parallel with the growth of data services and the services provided 
by HTS systems. In addition, and in correlation with a marked decrease in satellite capacity, 
an increasing number of operators have started to move down in the value chain by offering 
managed capacity directly using Mbps or GB (GigaByte) as opposed to using raw capacity 
(in MHz).
Beyond those trends, several factors have affected the price of satellite capacity including 
frequency-band, power, back up duration and volume of the lease. Other operatorspecific factors (a unique beam or interconnectivity scheme, exclusive coverage/power level, 
teleport service, backhaul service) have come into play. These factors help differentiate 
satellite bandwidth from a commodity and highlight satellites’ ability to provide services 
that could not exist without them (aero/maritime connectivity) or that alternative terrestrial 
solutions would not provide as efficiently from a financial point of view.
While all customers of capacity expect a high-quality service, different types of customers 
have different priorities, and this can greatly affect capacity pricing. 
The red box on the right provides a sample of the criteria that certain user segments consider 
to be highly important for them. Four major factors contribute to the definition of capacity 
pricing in the various regions and segments:
• The purchasing power of the targeted customers.
• The cost-efficiency of satellite assets (i.e., the price level required to generate a return).
• The balance between supply and demand/the level of competitive pressure.
• The nature of the operator (fully commercial, government owned).
Sample of basic requirements for secure SATCOM 
provisions
Depending on regulatory obligations & the criticality of communications these may be 
the basic requirements:
• A high availability rate for the network.
• A cost-effective solution for users (with varied levels of sensitivity).
For mobile and/or occasional requirements (such as defence users), there may be:
• The ability to provide seamless connections to different locations.
• A single contact point for capacity management.
• Strong back-up options in case of satellite failure.
Role and impact of newcomers
New entrants refer to non-incumbent/non-legacy secure SATCOM providers (for instance, 
SES, Eutelsat, Marlink… are incumbent players). They have to face high barriers to entry
such as the finite resource of orbital positions/frequencies, need for high upfront CAPEX 
(Capital Expenditure) before operations and high technical expertise throughout the 
satellite lifecycle.
Their impact is twofold: Firstly, they provide innovative solutions which open the door to 
new applications or unlock some barriers to entry. For instance, new technologies have 
enabled the production of low-cost, low-power, small size antennas for fixed and mobile 
terminals. More generally, newcomers disrupt the traditional way of doing things. In 
addition. New entrants reinforce the competition between the market players and lead them 
to develop innovative and cost-effective solutions providing benefits for the end-users. For 
instance, Starlink (SpaceX) could have a significant impact on the satellite capacity pricing 
in a short-term perspective by leading incumbent satellite operators/service providers to 
adapt to new market conditions.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 29
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM DEMAND SECURE SATCOM MARKET DEMAND
Major features of secure SATCOM services defined by contractual 
agreements
Focus on the Service Level Agreement (SLA)
A Service-Level Agreement (SLA) is a contract between the provider of the services and its 
customers that documents what services the provider will furnish and defines the service 
standards the provider is obligated to meet. Service providers need SLAs to help them 
manage customer expectations and define the severity levels and circumstances under 
which they are not liable for outages or performance issues. Customers can also benefit 
from SLAs because the contract describes the performance characteristics of the service – 
which can be compared with other vendors' SLAs – and sets forth the means for redressing 
service issues.
For secure SATCOM, the SLA is usually more demanding than for SATCOM as it generally 
includes a higher level of guarantee for the provision of the services. SLAs can be classified 
in different types, from the less to the more demanding. An SLA includes generally the 
following items:
• Guarantee of access to the service: Commitment from the service provider to provide the 
service according to the agreed contractual performances (generally greater than 99%). 
In general, the more demanding are SLAs regarding service continuity and availability, 
the greater the impact on the price of its provision.
• Reporting processes: Definition of the process for reporting some information on a 
periodic basis or on request when an incident happens.
• Customer support: Provision of a dedicated service manager and 24/7/365 customer 
service. Agreement for restoration times or reaction times to respond to an incident, 
warehouses (for maintenance and repair of the hardware equipment), training.
• Potential additional value-added services such as Cloud connectivity, End-to-end 
managed services using SD-WAN (Software-Defined Wide Area Network) orchestration, 
Bandwidth on demand, Data management (web compression, filtering and firewalling), 
IT services.
Business model for terminals
The customer for secure SATCOM services can have different approach to the procurement 
and operation of terminals:
• Build: The customer procures bespoke terminals developed according to their 
specification.
• Buy: The customer procures the terminal according to dedicated catalogues.
• Lease: The customer procures access to terminal through lease agreements with 
suppliers.
• Gov2Gov: The governmental user gains access to terminals through agreements with 
other governments or institutions (European Commission, European Defence Agency, 
NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organisation)). For instance, as a part of EU SATCOM 
market (led by EDA), Airbus delivers SATCOM services to EU member States, EU military 
and civilian missions, as well as EU bodies. The contract covers the provision of satellite 
communication (C-, Ku-, Ka- and L-band), the sale and rental of terminals, as well as the 
provision of turnkey solutions, particularly in theatres of operations outside of the EU. 
In the frame of this contract, Marlink supply some of the terminals and specific L- and 
Ku-band services. As of April 2022, the EU SATCOM market had 33 members and, on 
average, a new SATCOM order is coming in every 1.5 days.
The chosen approach by the customer may depend on the characteristics of the use case/
mission. As of today, most of the terminals used for the provision of secure SATCOM services 
are bought. Indeed, in addition to the ownership (which guarantee access to terminal 
availability), “buy” choice has an advantage from a financial point of view: customers 
request the relevant budget only at the purchase period, and not on a yearly basis to pay 
the lease. It is noteworthy, that in case of lease, the terminal has to be returned in good 
working condition at the end of the lease agreement while some working conditions and 
environment can be harsh for some mission/use cases.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 30
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM DEMAND SECURE SATCOM MARKET DEMAND
Secure SATCOM use cases in the EU
The secure SATCOM market is shaped according to the list of the use cases categories envisaged for GOVSATCOM as identified below and considered the GOVSATCOM component of 
the EU Space Programme (cf. page 11). In addition to the three use case categories (surveillance, crisis management and key infrastructure), another use case category exists, named 
Specific Use Case. In the frame of the present satellite capacity demand analysis, it includes one use case (“Polar regions”) which has been identified as users or potential users of satellite 
communications in Polar regions (i.e. Arctic region) for EU Member States and EU Institutional entities. Some user needs may apply to more than one category, for instance the satellite 
communication demand from the Specific Use Case “RPAS C&C” is included in all the use cases where RPAS (i.e. UAV (Unmanned Aerial Vehicle)) is concerned. Similarly, the demand for 
the Specific Use Case “M2M (Machine to Machine)/IoT (Internet of Things)” is included in several use cases such as Transport Infrastructures and Other Critical Infrastructures.
The different use case categories include both missions currently using SATCOM to a large extent and missions which are not yet SATCOM users or are only to a limited extent.
Surveillance Crisis Management Key Infrastructure Specific Use Case
Maritime Emergency 
(i.e Search & Rescue missions and response
to maritime disasters)
Land Border Surveillance
(i.e the surveillance of sea
and land border)
Transport Infrastructures
(i.e Air, Road, Rail and Maritime traffic
management)
Polar regions 
(i.e SATCOM for government, public and
scientific research institutions in Arctic region)
Humanitarian Aid 
(i.e the assistance in case of disasters/conflicts, 
to refugees and telemedicine)
Maritime Surveillance 
(i.e the surveillance of illegal
activities)
Space Infrastructures
(i.e support to GNSS, EO and SSA 
activities)
Civil Protection
(i.e activation of the related forces such
as ambulance, fire rescue in case of disasters)
Institutional Communications 
(i.e SATCOM for embassies,
EU representations offices)
EU External Actions 
(i.e CSDP missions, election observation
and contribution to UN missions)
Other Critical Infrastructures 
(i.e SATCOM link for critical infrastructure such 
as energy grid and financial ones)
Forces Deployment 
(i.e the deployment of EU Member States forces 
as part of national/European missions)
Law Enforcement Interventions 
(i.e national police misions and fight against 
international organized crime groups)
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 31
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM DEMAND SECURE SATCOM MARKET DEMAND
Factors influencing the demand of secure SATCOM
(1) Banque Mondiale. Croissance du PIB (% annuel]. 
(2) World Bank Blogs. 2023. Sowing the seeds of change to solve the water crisis, August 18
(3) European Commission. What the Commission is doing. Borders and security.
Geopolitical trends 
& evolution of threat 
environment
Geopolitical tensions increase the needs for border and 
maritime surveillance, security of the key infrastructure, 
diplomatic activities and crisis management missions.
Climate change & 
global warming
Changing climatic conditions have two types of major 
consequence, leading to a growing needs for secure 
SATCOM. Firstly, global warming will lead to more 
humanitarian crises and secondly, it will also increase 
shifts in population, requiring more border surveillance and 
humanitarian activities.
Economic growth 
& rise of digital 
economy
Economic growth (or slowdown) may have a major impact 
on world trade and commercial exchanges, especially 
for aircrafts and merchant ships. Since the middle of 
20th century, the GDP (Gross Domestic Product) has 
continuously grown with a temporary decrease in 2008 
(financial crisis) and 2020 (COVID-19)(1). The World Bank’s 
short term forecasts point to continued growth in the global 
economy(2).
National and 
International 
regulations/EU 
policy
Regulations and EU Policies are major growth drivers for 
secure SATCOM. An example is the European Security 
Strategy and the Internal Security Strategy efforts to make 
Europe more secure by fighting terrorism and serious crime, 
and strengthening cooperation on law enforcement, border 
management, civil protection and disaster management(3).
Fragmentation
of the demand
The so-called “fragmentation of the demand” refers to the 
diversity of the users’ needs and requirements. Differences 
can vary from the applications being used, to the nature 
of traffic(permanent links to on-demand/occasional 
requirement), to the location of the users (fixed location, 
transportable, mobile) etc..
Affordable
and interoperable 
equipment
The end-users need to have access to equipment suitable 
and adequate to perform their missions. Among all the 
elements of the satellite communication value chain, the 
terminals are a major point. Terminals must be fit for the 
purpose and need to be available at an affordable price.
Need for significant 
awareness and 
expertise
of the users
Awareness of the actual benefits and the key advantages
of secure satellite communications solutions is a key driver
for the user demand.
In addition, the end-users must be trained to exploit the 
secure satellite communication capabilities during the 
missions.
DRIVERS BARRIERS & INHIBITORS
The following table presents key driving elements, barriers and inhibitors for the use of secure SATCOM by National and European user communities. They apply to different use cases/use 
case categories with different levels of impacts. For each use case, a presentation of the dynamics and drivers of the demand will be provided in the next pages.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 32
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM DEMAND SECURE SATCOM MARKET DEMAND
Methodology used to assess secure SATCOM capacity demand
for the European Union users
Users of secure SATCOM are civil and military entities supervising or managing securitycritical missions or infrastructures, including Union and Member State public authorities; 
they can be located in European Union or deployed worldwide. The quantified demand 
presented in the next pages concerns users belonging to each EU Member States, as well 
as EU Institutional entities, located in the European mainland and worldwide(1), across the 
identified secure SATCOM use cases(1). 
A bottom-up approach was followed, assessing each use case and end-users' requirements 
as well. The analysis also takes into account the dynamics and drivers of every type of 
missions and applications. The analysis starts with the identification of all actors, end-users 
and the assets, and the staff needed to be deployed in order to comply with the missions. 
The analysis also includes the estimated number of units and assets deployed taking into 
account both:
• the geographical distribution.
• the needs or actual use that may be different for EU Member States and for EU Institutional 
entities as well as by types of mission.
In the frame of satellite capacity forecast, the vast majority of the satellite capacity demand 
arises from FSS. However, MSS data would be important for the future secure SATCOM 
offering. MSS terminals operate in lower frequency-band (such as L-band or S-band), with 
limited data rate but have smaller size and are provided at lower cost in comparison to FSS 
terminals. 
Finally, the analysis provides the information on the amount of satellite capacity forecast to 
be used per use case category. The analysis does not include the user demand which might 
be possibly satisfied by optical links. 
(1) Regulation (EU) 2021/696 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 April 2021 establishing the Union Space 
Programme and the European Union Agency for the Space Programme, Article 65.
Step by step approach by use case
Identification of actors and end-users
Identification of units (staffs, assets ….)
Penetration rate (FSS & MSS)
Connected Units (FSS & MSS)
Average Data Rate per Units (FSS & MSS)
Total Capacity Demand (FSS & MSS)
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 33
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM DEMAND SECURE SATCOM MARKET DEMAND
KPP Definition Status
Link Purpose Allows qualifying the anticipated role in satellite. This shall also 
commenting on the impact of requirement for new network.
- Primary (for primary connection)
- Backup (for backup role)
Mobility Enables to qualify the type of traffic, potential changes in the patterns 
over time.
- Fixed
- Deployable
- COTM (Communication On The Move)
Bandwidth level Distribution of assets by level of data rates, in order to highlight some 
transverse trends through the different use cases.
- Below 10 Mbps
- 10 – 25 Mbps
- 25 – 50 Mbps
- 50 – 100 Mbps
- Greater than 100 Mbps
Geographic distribution Allow to assess the traffic per different geographical areas.
- EU continent & waters - Polar
- Middle East & Africa - Americas
- Asia Pacific - Atlantic
Latency Allow to assess the share of traffic which may need (or not) low latency. 
Low latency is considered below 250 ms.
Level 1: Low latency estimated to be critical for up to the majority of the 
traffic (>65%)
Level 2: Low latency estimated to be critical/having a high added value 
for a significant part of the traffic (> 20%)
Level 3: Low latency not to be critical, although it could be beneficial
Key Performance Parameters
Several Key Performance Parameters (KPP) have been introduced to facilitate the computation of different traffic distribution and to illustrate certain future demand patterns across the 
use cases.
The following table presents the different KPPs and give a few examples of the use of KPP to different terminals.
Notes: Low latency is typically required for (near-) real time applications. Since one specific terminal might be used to serve more than one application needed in a specific use case, the 
notion of ‘low latency’ would only correspond to part of the traffic associated to the concerned use case.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 34
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM DEMAND SECURE SATCOM MARKET DEMAND
Ref. Name In the report
AOCI Continental Europe and EU 
outermost regions Europe
AOC2 Mediterranean sea and North 
Africa Europe
AOC3 Turkey & Middle East Middle East & Africa
AOC4 Central Africa Middle East & Africa
AOC5 Southern Africa Middle East & Africa
AOC6 Arabian Sea and Gulf of Aden Middle East & Africa
AOC7 Greenland and North Europe No pricing available
AOC8 South-West Asia Asia Pacific
AOC9 Russia and Central Asia Asia Pacific
AOC10 Rest of the Arctic Polar
AOC11 China and South-East Asia Asia Pacific
AOC12 Oceania and Indian Ocean Asia Pacific
AOC13 Pacific Ocean Asia Pacific
AOC14 North and Central America Americas
AOC15 South of America Americas
AOC16 North Atlantic Atlantic
AOC17 South Atlantic Atlantic
KPP – definition of geographic distribution
Secure SATCOM user demand can vary from a geographical area to another. A potential overlap exists between certain areas (e.g. the need in mobile assets)
and subsequently the consolidated value coming from the whole distribution by region may exceed the total estimated demand as provided by different use cases.
The table below presents the distribution matrix between the geographical areas as defined in the ENTRUSTED project(1).
Geographical distribution (as defined in ENTRUSTED project)
(1) ENTRUSTED project (H2020 Grant Agreement No. 870330) https://entrusted.eu/
*See: EU & outermost regions – Regional Policy – European Commission (europa.eu) 
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 35
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM DEMAND SECURE SATCOM MARKET DEMAND
Surveillance
2025 2030 2035 2040
Crisis Management Key Infrastructure Polar Regions
230 000
172 500
115 000
57 500
0
Mbps
Synthesis of the FSS capacity demand forecast 2025 – 2040
Both FSS and MSS capacity demand for secure SATCOM have been estimated; The FSS 
capacity demand will be presented first FSS type (from page 35 to 39) and MSS later (page 
40). The figure on the top presents the estimated capacity demand for secure SATCOM (FSS) 
and for each of the three different use case categories. It is estimated that user demand with 
FSS solutions will increase by a factor of 14 over the 2025 – 2040 period to reach around 
186 Gbps in 2040.
In 2025, the FSS capacity demand for Crisis Management is expected to count for around 
half of the total FSS capacity demand, with Crisis Management representing be-tween 40% 
and 50% of the anticipated demand over the forecast period. Within this appli-cation field,
Forces Deployment is estimated to represent the highest level of demand, followed by 
Civil Protection and Law Enforcement interventions. For Forces Deployment , the Strategic 
Compass and the future threats are by themselves a key driver for future secure SATCOM 
demand. A trend towards an increasing number of units equipped with a communication on 
the move capability, the spread of more sensors, the sharing of data richer information, has 
been assessed to contribute to higher secure SATCOM needs for military users.
From around 2030, the Key Infrastructure category will generate the highest level of 
demand to represent around 50% of the total capacity demand in 2040. The two largest 
uses cases within the segment are Institutional Communications and Other Critical 
Infrastructures.
When it comes to Institutional Communications, several European Union entities (EU 
Delegation,EU embassies) and national entities (national embassies) are located worldwide 
where reliable terrestrial communications means are not always available. It is esti-mated 
they would need more satellite capacity, relying on global higher satellite capacity demand. 
Moreover, the geopolitical context, cyber and hybrid threats further prompt secu-rity and 
resilience concern. It significantly increases the need of a guaranteed and secure access 
to communication means for any type of Institutional Communications. As regards Other 
Critical Infrastructures, such as the banking and energy sector as well as specific European 
and National infrastructures are strategic assets for European Union. The numbers of those 
entities are not expected to substantially increase in the coming decade, but only their need 
for reliable, secure and guaranteed communication means. Digital transformation of both the 
EU economy and so-ciety is accelerating and the digital information of the infrastructures 
as well. Such infrastructures are key for, among others, the development of e-government 
services, the simplification of administrative procedures/formalities and the increasing 
digitalization of public ser-vices. Among them, data centres are key for resilience and EU 
data protection and confidentiality standards. Their use is expected to rise in the coming 
decade with important required data rate (several hundreds of Gbps). An illustration of 
their ex-pected increasing use is the European Union investigations to improve the energy 
efficiency and circular economy performance in cloud computing and data centres(1).
As previously stated, the estimated level of demand is contingent, among other factors, 
upon the availability of a secure SATCOM service in the different time periods, with technical/
operational features and prices (for both connectivity services and terminals) allowing and 
favouring a large adoption. For certain use cases, accelerated deployment may also come 
from the presence of regulatory mandates (it is assessed such regulatory factor would arise 
over the 2025–2040 period). Taking a concrete example, the ability of certain military forces 
to use new secure solutions by 2025 may also depend on the deployment of new terminals 
or in the ability to use their existing terminals (or ones already under procurement) to receive 
secure SATCOM services.
(1) European Commission. Green cloud and green data centres. Shaping Europe’s digital future.
Estimated capacity demand for secure SATCOM – FSS (Mbps) 
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 36
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM DEMAND SECURE SATCOM MARKET DEMAND
KPP synthesis for future FSS secure SATCOM capacity demand
Latency Geographical
distribution
Resilience Mobility
EU continent & waters 
alongside the Middle 
East and Africa are 
estimated to account 
for ~85% of the total 
demand over the 2025–
2040 period
For up to ~70%(1) of 
total capacity demand, 
low latency(2) is either 
advantageous or even
critical. 
Communication on the 
move and through for 
deployable units are 
estimated to represent 
>33% of total FSS 
capacity demand
SATCOM as a backup 
connectivity to enhance 
resilience of critical 
infrastructure shall
represent ~35-40 % of 
total FSS capacity demand
(1) Part of this 70% still finds value in GOVSATCOM (GEO-only)
(2) Low latency (below 250 ms) is defined on page 33 
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 37
SECURE SATCOM DEMAND PER KPP SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
2025 2030 2035 2040
Fixed COTM Deployable
200 000
150 000
100 000
50 000
0
Mbps
2025 2030 2035 2040
Primary Backup
200 000
150 000
100 000
50 000
0
Mbps
2025 2030 2035 2040
Fixed COTM Deployable
200 000
150 000
100 000
50 000
0
Mbps
2025 2030 2035 2040
Primary Backup
200 000
150 000
100 000
50 000
0
Mbps
Growing mobility demand for both primary and backup solutions
Secure satellite connectivity is projected to serve as the primary means of communication 
for users (partially or totally) out of reach of terrestrial networks or with specific needs.
That is the case for users operating at sea or in remote locations, as well as in cases where 
terrestrial services are disrupted (e.g. after natural disasters), or for users with stringent 
requirements in need of secured/dedicated network (such as Institutional communications).
However, satellite connectivity can be used as a backup solution, offering both redundancy 
and enhanced availability to cope with outages. Such demand is estimated to mainly come 
from fixed sites established in the European Union territory. Most of those sites,from certain 
headquarters to data centres and special operation sites including for space missions, will 
predominately rely on fibre connectivity. Nevertheless,a backup solution will likely often in 
the meantime require a high level of satellite capacity(up to hundreds of Mbps) to guarantee 
a sufficient resilience for critical data exchanges.
Capacity demand from fixed users is estimated to represent 62% of the total FSS capacity 
demand all over the 2025 – 2040 period. For fixed users, most of the demand is estimated to 
come from Civil Protection, Forces Deployment, (Crisis Management), Space infrastructure 
, Institutional Communications and Other Critical infrastructures (Key Infrastructure) use 
cases. It should be noted that we considered as fixed locations, terminals that would remain 
deployed for a long time, even if the installation is not permanent (example: case of certain 
refugee camps). 
Capacity demand for COTM (Communications on the Move) users is estimated to 
represent about 25% of the total FSS capacity demand all over the 2025 – 2040 period.
Increasing equipment of mobile units (aircraft, vessels, land vehicles and UAVs), together 
with increasing data transmissions per unit is estimated to support demand.
In comparison, capacity demand for deployable units is estimated to also increase but at a 
slower pace.
FSS capacity demand – Mobility (Mbps) 
FSS capacity demand – primary or backup solution (Mbps) 
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 38
SECURE SATCOM DEMAND PER KPP SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
2025 2030 2035 2040
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
200 000
150 000
100 000
50 000
0
Mbps
Low latency is important for the majority of the FSS secure SATCOM 
demand
Estimating the criticality of latency in future capacity demand is subject to several 
considerations and assumptions for several reasons. Firstly, a user might use a single 
terminal for multiple applications, some of which mandatorily require low latency, while 
others may find it advantageous but not critical (and others not require it at all). Futhermore, 
future satellite communication terminals may be able to communicate with different 
satellite networks (i.e. in different orbits and frequency bands). While such terminals may 
not be widespread in the short term, they are estimated to become increasingly available 
over the forecast period. 
When a terminal carries substantial traffic that requires a low latency (or in case some 
data links are critical even if requiring low capacity), it is assumed that the end user would 
primarily choose a satellite terminal and network meeting its requirement for low latency.
Terminals considered as corresponding to Level 1 shall generate around 25% of the total 
FSS capacity demand that was estimated between 2025 and 2040. It includes Hospitals 
for telemedicine, Central command sites, Nuclear Power Plants, Financial infrastructure and 
Data Centres. Terminals that we considered as corresponding to Level 2 shall generate 
more than two thirds of the total FSS capacity demand that was estimated between 
2025 and 2040. Terminals that we considered as corresponding to Level 3 shall generate 
less than 10% of the total FSS capacity over the 2025 – 2040 period and mainly comes 
from Humanitarian Aid and certain use cases related to Space Infrastructures.
It is noteworthy that even for terminals/traffic that could benefit from a lower latency, a 
migration may only occur when an appropriate network is available. For legacy networks, it 
can also be dependent on the lifecycle of current terminals. It remains noteworthy that it is 
anticipated that a majority of the users could give priority to a network with a low latency 
(pending adequate technical, operational and pricing features). Availability of flexible 
terminals enabling access to several networks (and tentatively several frequency bands) 
is estimated to represent an important enabler in the middle term, also favoring the 
traffic capacity optimisation.
FSS capacity demand – Estimated importance of latency
by user terminal (Mbps)
Definition of the different levels for low-latency
• Level 1: Low latency estimated to be critical for up to the majority of the traffic 
(>65%)
• Level 2: Low latency estimated to be critical/having a high added value for
a significant part of the traffic (>20%)
• Level 3: Low latency not to be critical, although it could be beneficial
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 39
SECURE SATCOM DEMAND PER KPP SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
Geographical coverage need for secure SATCOM
About two-thirds of the FSS 
capacity demand will come 
from the EU continent & waters 
geographical area. It would 
include needs for permanent 
operational missions and needs 
for backup communications, with 
an increasing need to guarantee 
an additional resilience to 
communication networks.
Middle East and Africa is the 
second geographical area for 
the FSS capacity demand. It 
is noteworthy that the vast 
majority of the demand in this 
region comes from three uses 
cases, belonging to the Crisis 
Management use cases family: 
Humanitarian Aid, EU External 
Action and Forces Deployment.
Geographical distribution of the FSS capacity demand
EU continent & waters
2025 2030 2035 2040
140 000
120 000
100 000
80 000
60 000
40 000
20 000
0
Mbps
EU continent & waters
Atlantic
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Atlantic
Americas
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Americas
Asia Pacific
2025 2030 2035 2040 2025 2030 2035 2040 2025 2030 2035 2040
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Asia Pacific
Polar
2025 2030 2035 2040
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Polar
Middle East & Africa
2025 2030 2035 2040
140 000
120 000
100 000
80 000
60 000
40 000
20 000
0
Mbps
Middle East & Africa
EU continent & waters
2025 2030 2035 2040
140 000
120 000
100 000
80 000
60 000
40 000
20 000
0
Mbps
EU continent & waters
Atlantic
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Atlantic
Americas
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Americas
Asia Pacific
2025 2030 2035 2040 2025 2030 2035 2040 2025 2030 2035 2040
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Asia Pacific
Polar
2025 2030 2035 2040
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Polar
Middle East & Africa
2025 2030 2035 2040
140 000
120 000
100 000
80 000
60 000
40 000
20 000
0
Mbps
Middle East & Africa
EU continent & waters
2025 2030 2035 2040
140 000
120 000
100 000
80 000
60 000
40 000
20 000
0
Mbps
EU continent & waters
Atlantic
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Atlantic
Americas
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Americas
Asia Pacific
2025 2030 2035 2040 2025 2030 2035 2040 2025 2030 2035 2040
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Asia Pacific
Polar
2025 2030 2035 2040
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Polar
Middle East & Africa
2025 2030 2035 2040
140 000
120 000
100 000
80 000
60 000
40 000
20 000
0
Mbps
Middle East & Africa
EU continent & waters
2025 2030 2035 2040
140 000
120 000
100 000
80 000
60 000
40 000
20 000
0
Mbps
EU continent & waters
Atlantic
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Atlantic
Americas
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Americas
Asia Pacific
2025 2030 2035 2040 2025 2030 2035 2040 2025 2030 2035 2040
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Asia Pacific
Polar
2025 2030 2035 2040
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Polar
Middle East & Africa
2025 2030 2035 2040
140 000
120 000
100 000
80 000
60 000
40 000
20 000
0
Mbps
Middle East & Africa
EU continent & waters
2025 2030 2035 2040
140 000
120 000
100 000
80 000
60 000
40 000
20 000
0
Mbps
EU continent & waters
Atlantic
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Atlantic
Americas
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Americas
Asia Pacific
2025 2030 2035 2040 2025 2030 2035 2040 2025 2030 2035 2040
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Asia Pacific
Polar
2025 2030 2035 2040
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Polar
Middle East & Africa
2025 2030 2035 2040
140 000
120 000
100 000
80 000
60 000
40 000
20 000
0
Mbps
Middle East & Africa
EU continent & waters
2025 2030 2035 2040
140 000
120 000
100 000
80 000
60 000
40 000
20 000
0
Mbps
EU continent & waters
Atlantic
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Atlantic
Americas
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Americas
Asia Pacific
2025 2030 2035 2040 2025 2030 2035 2040 2025 2030 2035 2040
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Asia Pacific
Polar
2025 2030 2035 2040
20 000
16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
Mbps
Polar
Middle East & Africa
2025 2030 2035 2040
140 000
120 000
100 000
80 000
60 000
40 000
20 000
0
Mbps
Middle East & Africa
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 39
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 40
SECURE SATCOM DEMAND PER KPP SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
Surveillance Crisis Management
Key Infrastructure Polar Regions
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
Mbps
Synthesis of the MSS capacity demand forecast 2025 – 2040
As mentioned earlier in the report, the vast majority of the satellite capacity demand arises 
from FSS type. However, it is noteworthy to mention that MSS data will be important for 
the future secure SATCOM offering. MSS terminals operate in lower frequency-band (such 
as L-band or S-band), with limited data rate but have smaller size and are provided at lower 
cost in comparison to FSS terminals.
User demand for secure SATCOM from MSS satellite networks/capacity is expected to 
increase from around 1.2 Gbps (2025) to 3.9 Gbps (2040).
It is noteworthy that MSS spectrum is also used to support IoT services. While these 
terminals may represent large volumes, the actual related capacity remains limited as it 
primarily corresponds to data bursts representing in each case a few kilobits. Exceptions 
may however correspond to services where IoT/data collection comes together with a return 
link or includes more data transmissions (such as sending images or video material).
We estimate that most of the user demand for MSS capacity will come from the maritime 
surveillance missions and operations. Indeed, the majority of the maritime surveillance 
units will likely rely on MSS either as a primary or backup solution. 
Estimated capacity demand for secure SATCOM – MSS (Mbps)(1)
(1) The data does not include satellite capacity for AIS, ADS-B (Automatic Dependent Surveillance-broadcast) (Aircraft), LRIT (Long 
Range Identification And Tracking) /VMS (Vehicle Monitoring System) (Vessels) and IoT for cars and trains (IoT for cars and trains 
are assessed below 10 Mbps in 2040)
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 41
USE CASES PRESENTATION SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
Following the analysis of the overall secure SATCOM capacity demand, each use case 
belonging to the three use case categories (Surveillance, Crisis Management and Key 
Infrastructure) and the use case Polar regions, is presented. 
For each addressed use case the specific different actors (i.e. EU National and/or European 
organizations) which use secure SATCOM are first presented. Secondly, the connected units 
(i.e. the assets which are operationally connected to space-based systems to communicate) 
are detailed. Thirdly, the dynamics and drivers of the secure SATCOM demand are assessed. 
Finally, the geographical coverage paragraph provides an indication where secure SATCOM 
is needed to answer the operational needs of the use case. To be noted that, although 
the use cases may refer to missions beyond EU territory, they are always intended for EU 
Member States and/or European Union users.
Use cases presentation
© Unsplash
© Unsplash
© Unsplash © Unsplash
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 42
USE CASES PRESENTATION SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
Actors
Frontex (European Border and Coast Guard Agency) together with Member States ensure 
safe and well-functioning external borders providing security. Its main tasks is to protect 
borders, to fight cross-border crime, to monitor borders, perform risk analysis, seek 
international and EU cooperation, provide training, conduct research and innovation, provide 
return and reintegration and ensure safer Schengen and smoother travels.
At national level, national police and customs agency are also part of the land border 
surveillance use case users. 
Connected units and their use of secure SATCOM
A diversity of assets can take advantage of secure SATCOM. Frontex works in coordination 
with EU member states. A headquarter for centralised communication of assets, institutions 
and governments can be used for information sharing, real-time monitoring and control.
Aircraft, helicopters, vessels, road vehicles and UAVs can also rely on secure SATCOM 
to exchange information/data in the frame of the Land Surveillance use case. Aircrafts 
are used for surveillance, rescue and joint return operations. Secure SATCOM can 
enable real-time information sharing through video surveillance and communication. 
Helicopters are used to transport people, equipment and supplies. Secure SATCOM can 
aid communication through for a more targeted approach towards an operation. Vessels 
are used for surveillance, illegal migrants' control and search and rescue missions. Having 
satellite connectivity can enable centralised video surveillance and quick response for 
search and rescue missions.
Frontex rolled out its own patrol vehicles in 2019. Surveillance on land and having 
satellite connectivity on-board road vehicles can ensure better information gathering, 
video surveillance and quick response in case of border breach. Patrol officers can use 
secure SATCOM to alert headquarters of any disturbance at border and for an active 
communication link in case of land border breach or equipment malfunction.
Large UAVs are used for surveillance covering a large area and can reach an altitude of 
15.24 kilometres with speeds up to 444 km/h staying aloft up to 30 hours. Small UAVs can 
be used at a shorter range for imaging and movement detection through radars and have 
altitudes up to 450 m, speed up to 50 km/h and endurance of 30 – 50 min.
Dynamics and drivers of the demand
Irregular and illegal migration have been a strong concern for European Union countries. 
Climate change, geopolitical tensions, international conflicts and wars lead people to 
migrate. As those factors are set to increase, need for land border surveillance is expected 
to grow in the coming years. Migration flows evolve, based on economic opportunities and 
border regimes in different countries. Thus, innovative solutions need to be implemented
to prevent not only illegal migration, but also any type of entities which plan to threaten 
peace at all land borders.
Land border surveillance use case
Geographical coverage
Primarily European Union (including
the overseas territories) focused on land 
and sea borders.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 43
USE CASES PRESENTATION SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
Actors
The maritime surveillance is usually conducted by the Navy and Coast Guards which 
ensure the safety and security of national marine borders and the territorial waters. These 
agencies also provide safe waters for the sea-borne trade in the waters controlled by them 
by counteracting against piracy and other illegal activities. Apart from national agencies 
and Frontex, European Union has EMSA (European Maritime Safety Agency). Europe also 
has a common body called European Fisheries Control Agency (EFCA) to regulate the 
fishing activities within European waters. Within the European Union, there are at least 25 
Members States with a functional navy as a part of the country’s defence forces. Some of 
the countries even have active coast guards in addition to the navy to secure the country’s 
marine borders. 
More often, coast guards act in unison with the naval forces and even sometimes are part 
of the navy itself. Most of the European countries are also a part of the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organisation (NATO) agreement and often deploy their navy vessels in regions covered 
under the agreement.
Connected units and their use of secure SATCOM
Maritime surveillance activities require marine vessels to establish control over national 
territorial waters. We have assumed that vessels with sizes greater than 20 m will require 
at least one means of satellite communication. Smaller vessels (sizes less than 20 m) usually 
conduct nearshore operations and spend most of the time in the terrestrial network coverage, 
communication is mainly served by the terrestrial means. Bigger naval vessels, such as 
aircraft carriers, frigates, ocean-going patrol vessels, etc. normally host larger onboard crew 
and participate in the missions globally, are already fitted with FSS and MSS as a backup.
The maritime surveillance from the air is comprised of aircrafts (fixed wing) and helicopters 
possesses an onboard satellite connectivity terminals that can be used to establish missioncritical communication and to acquire crucial communication during maritime surveillance. 
The business aircrafts that are used for transporting important persons are possibly equipped 
with FSS as well as MSS terminals. Helicopters were more difficult to equip with satellite 
connection due to their constantly rotating rotors. The new terminal technology is able to 
Maritime surveillance use case
Geographical coverage
• Very large to medium vessels: 
worldwide.
• Small vessels, aircraft, helicopters and 
UAVs: European Union.
overcome this problem and as a result, make it possible to equip a helicopter with satellite 
connectivity. UAVs are more reliant on satellite connectivity, but it depends on the size and 
operational range of the UAV. Smaller UAVs are not able to support the weight of the FSS 
equipment hence they are addressed by either MSS or terrestrial means of communications.
Satellite connectivity is estimated to be used as primary connectivity as the operational 
areas of connected units are out of reach of terrestrial networks.
Dynamics and drivers of the demand
Maritime surveillance is a major activity for defence forces and coast guards and their 
respective vessels use secure SATCOM for both crew welfare and operational needs.
For aircraft, helicopters and UAVs, the demand is purely from their operational applications.
The continuous efforts to develop smart ships, unmanned vessels and UAV’s that will 
increasingly be deployed for maritime surveillance activities will escalate the demand for 
higher, faster and more reliable bandwidth.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 44
USE CASES PRESENTATION SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
Actors
The actors involved in Maritime Emergency missions depend on the location of the 
vessel and on the type of emergency considered. Coastal states have adopted the IMSO 
(International Mobile Satellite Organisation) convention requiring ships to be equipped with 
GMDSS (Global Maritime Distress and Safety System). This system allows vessels in danger 
to send a distress call alerting other ships in the area which can help as well as the closest 
Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre (MRCC). This coordination centre will then send the 
information to local coast guards or Navy entities and ships to provide rescue as fast as 
possible.
In the case of a piracy or terrorist attack, ships can activate either their Ship Security Alert 
System (SSAS) or Ship Security Reporting System (SSRS). SSRS being the upgraded 
version of the SSAS. The signal emitted by the endangered vessel will be sent to Naval 
Operation Centres which will inform the closest Navy forces to provide military support. 
Furthermore, SSAS and SSRS calls can be answered by EU organisations in some specific 
areas of the world, even if they are not located in a Member State’s waters. Indeed, most 
SSAS and SSRS registered calls are in the Gulf of Aden. To protect ships in this strategic 
corridor, the Maritime Security Centre – Horn of Africa (MSCHOA) and United Kingdom 
Maritime Trade Operations (UKMTO) monitoring centres are in charge of collecting such 
calls and coordinating international efforts. They will inform an alliance of naval forces, the 
EU NAVFOR (EU Naval Forces) Somalia – Operation Atalanta, which takes action in the 
region against attackers.
Connected units and their use of secure SATCOM
A majority of the vessels spend most of their traveling time close to shore and thus remain in 
range of VHF communications. However, some of them engaged on international voyages 
or going farther from the shore need to be able to send emergency messages at all times, 
which includes when they are out of reach from those communications means. In that case, 
satellites provide a reliable connectivity solution allowing distress calls from ships to be sent.
Several types of vessels are connected through satellites, mainly due to national and 
international regulations. Usually, large and commercial ships are more subject to 
international regulations having them connected through satellites.
Maritime emergency use case
Geographical coverage Global
Merchant, cruise and offshore Oil & Gas vessels above 300 Gross Tonnage need to be 
equipped with GMDSS (Global Maritime Distress and Safety System). Required equipment 
for GMDSS includes a VHF radio, a Search & Rescue transponder, a NAVTEX receiver, an 
EPIRB (Emergency Position Indicating Radio Beacon) as well as DSC (Digital Selective 
Calling) and Inmarsat-C terminals.
In addition, all types of vessels above than 500 Gross Tonnage are required to be equipped 
with either SSAS (Ship Security Alert System) or its upgraded version, the SSRS (Ship 
Security Reporting System). SSAS and SSRS include a messaging service for security alerts 
in case of piracy or terrorist attack as well as two alarm buttons with no sound and no 
flashing lights so that they are not obvious to intruders. Finally, vessels can also rely on 
satellite communications for onboard reporting (e.g. emergencies, telemedicine).
Dynamics and drivers of the demand
Each of the Maritime Emergency related assets considered are mainly connected to comply 
with regulations. Consequently, the primary growth driver of secure SATCOM connectivity is 
the implementation of new regulations either by national or international bodies overseeing 
traffic of vessels. It can come as a totally new regulation or an enlargement of the scope of 
existing ones, thus affecting more assets. Moreover, the increasing importance of safety 
and control over the vehicles is estimated to further increase the demand in the coming 
years. For example, a modernisation of the GMDSS standards is expected to enter in service 
in 2024.
Another driver is the growth in the number of assets to be regulated due to an increase 
in the overall number of merchant ships, fishing vessels, cruise ships, yachts and offshore 
support vessels.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 45
USE CASES PRESENTATION SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
Actors
EU humanitarian action stands for the principle of solidarity, which indicates that the 
European Union will provide assistance, relief and protection for victims of disasters. 
Humanitarian aid missions include civil protection and humanitarian assistance in Europe 
but also outside of the region.
To avoid duplication of relief efforts, a response at European level is prioritised with the 
Emergency Response Coordination Centre (ERCC) at the heart of the EU Civil Protection 
Mechanism (EUCPM) created in 2001 by the European Commission to improve prevention, 
preparedness and response to disasters. Emergency relief provided by ERCC can take 
several forms including in-kind assistance such as the deployment of specially-equipped 
teams and assessment coordination of aid by experts sent to the impacted area. The 
EUCPM was activated 114 times in 2021 (1), with 61% of activations linked to COVID-19. 
For humanitarian aid, the ECHO department shares responsibilities with EU Member States. 
It has provided humanitarian assistance since 1992.
Other actors not managed directly by ECHO that are involved in humanitarian aid 
missions include the UN and other national government aid agencies. The UN is involved 
in peacekeeping missions whose mandate is to protect civilians under threat of physical 
harm. The protection of civilians is done in cooperation with humanitarian actors. The UN 
(via UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees) also offers shelter, food, 
water, and medical care to refugees. The UN usually assumes refugee camp coordination 
in refugee emergencies while NGO (Non-Governmental Organisation) partners or national 
authorities manage the camps. NGOs are also frequently involved in medical actions.
Connected units and their use of secure SATCOM
Secure SATCOM can act as the main option for some humanitarian aid missions (including 
the humanitarian teams and the hospitals/mobile clinics) in areas with no terrestrial 
connectivity (usually outside of Europe) or where terrestrial connectivity was cut due to a 
disaster. The need for telemedicine in these situations often occurs in a context of a lack of 
terrestrial infrastructure, calling for access to secure SATCOM. In this case, assured access 
to communications is critical for the preservation of life. The use of secure SATCOM is 
also key to assist different mobile units such as aircraft, helicopters and UAVs when EUCPM 
support is activated. SATCOM also often acts as back-up option (e.g. refugee camps). Crisis 
management missions are characterised by the need for back-up links for which secure 
SATCOM are well suited (e.g. civil protection after natural disasters or for humanitarian aid).
Dynamics and drivers of the demand
The number of forcibly displaced people including refugees has increased significantly in 
recent years. In the 2010s alone, the number of refugees has increased by 75%. Reasons 
for the growth trend include increasing global insecurity, geopolitical tensions and impact 
of climate change. The EU is increasingly impacted by the overall situation as displaced 
populations often end up in refugee camps, some of them based in the region (e.g. Greece, 
Spain). This regularly pushes the EU to assist countries in dealing with the challenge of 
hosting refugees (e.g. Greece) based on the principle of solidarity.
Due to the non-scheduled nature of disasters and armed conflicts, the EU must be able 
to rely on relevant communications network when needed to undertake relief efforts. 
In many cases, terrestrial networks are not sufficient to guarantee the success of EU 
interventions. The need for secure SATCOM in this segment is estimated to observe strong 
growth in the coming decades, notably due to the continued increase in refugees, many 
of them expected to seek asylum in the EU, which will likely push the region to increase 
refugee-related investments. In parallel, the growing expected number of disasters (natural 
and man-made) will lead to an increasing number of requests for EUCPM assistance with 
the EU expected to remain at the forefront of international relief actions.
Humanitarian aid use case
Geographical coverage Global with main focus on European 
Union and MEA (Middle East and Africa)
(1) European Commission. Emergency Response Coordination Centre (ERCC).
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 46
USE CASES PRESENTATION SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
Geographical coverage Prime focus on European Union, 
worldwide to assist other countries
Actors
Civil protection shares boundaries with humanitarian aid with both verticals complementing 
each other. In the frame of this report, the civil protection vertical considers needs of EU 
civilians with respect to disasters prevention and preparedness. Disasters can occur anywhere 
and at any time. For better readiness, it is important to ensure that existing infrastructure is 
capable enough to mitigate the repercussions of these disasters. At European level, there 
are different mechanism tools allowing the deployment of civil protection means.
EU Civil protection mechanism is a mechanism where in the occurrence of a natural or 
man-made disaster, the affected country can request assistance from the mechanism 
through the Emergency Response Coordination Centre (ERCC). After the affected country 
accepts the offer, member states help and ERCC coordinates the deployment and delivery 
of assistance. In some cases, EU civil protection teams are also deployed and are returned 
at the end of the emergence response. European Civil Protection Pool was established to 
advance European coordination in civil protection through bringing together 25 member 
states that are capable to deploy to a disaster zone (man-made or natural) at short notice. 
Said resources include rescue and medical teams, experts, specialized equipment, mobile 
laboratories, water purification equipment and transportation. Finally, rescEU is the latest 
element of civil protection introduced with the objective of enhancing the protection of 
citizens from disasters and the wider management of emerging risks. It also establishes a 
separate reserve of resources including firefighting planes, helicopters, medical evacuation 
planes, medical equipment and field hospitals. Said resources can help respond to health 
emergencies, chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear incidents.
Connected units and their use of secure SATCOM
With advancements in technology, it is now possible to not only detect and predict 
some disaster occurrences but also improve post-disaster management. Hospitals, 
ambulances and fire stations can be equipped with secure SATCOM technology enabling 
them to communicate in real-time developing effective and efficient emergency response 
programmes and provide support even in areas where there is limited availability of 
communication networks. Considering communication needs of citizens, mobile units to 
Civil protection use case
restore connectivity through secure SATCOM can be introduced. These units can provide 
connectivity in a large area to the effected population.
Firefighting planes are primarily used in case of large-scale forest fires and would require 
connectivity primarily for communication and image sharing. For firefighters, secure 
SATCOM is also key to offer guaranteed and resilient connectivity. Helicopters can be used 
to transport people, equipment and supplies and in this scenario, secure SATCOM can aid 
communication for a more targeted approach towards search and rescue.
Mobile Laboratories can be sent to an affected area prone to infectious viral and bacterial 
disease specially where there is a risk of spread. Secure SATCOM connectivity can give 
better access to necessary communication. Test samples results can even be sent over 
secure SATCOM link for more detailed research to find cures to disease. With specific 
medicals needs, such use case needs mostly low-latency satellite capacity.
Dynamics and drivers of the demand
Disasters are not limited to forest fires, health emergencies or hurricanes. As reported 
by GHSL (Global Human Settlement Layer), the populations exposed to earthquakes as 
well as built-up areas exposed to earthquakes has historically been increasing and similar 
trends apply to population and built-up areas within 100 Km of volcanoes, tsunami hazards, 
flood hazards and cyclone storm surges(1). Since limitations exist for traditional terrestrial 
communication infrastructure in these situations, having deployable units connected to 
satellites capable of restoring communication in such areas can be crucial. Connectivity, 
communication and information sharing through live video streams will not only be used by 
mobile units but also by the people they support leading to higher demand and growth of 
data utilisation in the civil protection use case.
(1) European Commission. 2021. Overview of natural and man-made disaster risks the European Union may face. 
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 47
USE CASES PRESENTATION SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
Actors
In the EU, law enforcement interventions are led at both a national and regional level. Each 
state has its own police force and law enforcement bodies that mainly conduct missions 
at a national or local level. Missions typically include policing, investigations, emergency 
measures and support services, the goal being to enforce the law, prevent and control 
crimes, maintain peace and order and ensure public safety. The number of bodies varies 
depending on the country (for instance, Germany has 16 state police forces and 3 federal 
law enforcement agencies). 
EMPACT (European Multidisciplinary Platform Against Criminal Threats) is a cooperation 
platform of EU members created in 2010. It is the EU’s flagship instrument to tackle 
organized and serious international crime. EMPACT is supported by all EU institutions, 
bodies and agencies that are involved in international law enforcement activities. They 
include EUROPOL (European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation), EUROJUST 
(European Union Agency for Criminal Justice Cooperation), CEPOL (European Union 
Agency for Law Enforcement Training), OLAF (European Anti-Fraud Office), EU-LISA 
(European Union Agency for the Operational Management of Large-Scale IT Systems in 
the Area of Freedom, Security and Justice) and EFCA (European Fisheries Control Agency). 
Other non-EU countries, international organisations, and other public and private partners 
are also associated. EMPACT became a permanent instrument in 2021. EUROPOL brings 
together hundreds of EU police organisations to fight crime as one player. The agency’s 
goal is to provide safety to EU citizens. Main areas of focus include terrorism, international 
drug trafficking, money laundering, organized fraud, trafficking in human beings and the 
counterfeiting of euros.
Each of the other EU agencies involved in international law enforcement activities has a 
specific focus. EUROJUST works with national authorities to combat cross-border crimes, 
OLAF investigates fraud within the EU, EU-LISA ensures the operation of large-scale IT 
systems, and Frontex is tasked with border control.
Connected units and their use of secure SATCOM
In the law enforcement interventions use case, both fixed and mobile assets require 
connectivity. Police communications include data, pictures and videos from surveillance 
units that must be exchanged promptly and seamlessly between HQ (Headquarters) and 
the Member’s law enforcement organisations while using highly secure links. Connectivity 
can frequently be used by these agencies for centralised communications, real-time 
monitoring of an event, information sharing and communication links between HQ and 
the Member’s law enforcement units. 
For mobile assets, having access to connectivity is key for numerous reasons including to 
stay in touch with other assets or ground control, and to acquire crucial communication 
during surveillance, search & rescue and other emergency situations. Law enforcement 
agencies frequently deploy various mobile assets (Police vehicles, aircrafts, helicopters and 
UAVs) depending on the nature and area of activity.
Dynamics and drivers of the demand
In the EU, most of the law enforcement communications are provided via terrestrial links 
(radio and fixed), with secure SATCOM understood to mainly be used as a backup. TETRA 
(Trans European Trunked Radio), an alternative to the use of cell phones for two-way 
communication (limited to 7.2 kbps channels), was designed for use by emergency services 
and is widely used by police forces. In coming years, the use of secure SATCOM is expected 
to grow with the question of communications anywhere and at any time represents a 
factor which is crucial for this segment to address ongoing threats (e.g. terrorism).
Law enforcement interventions use case
Geographical coverage European Union
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 48
USE CASES PRESENTATION SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
Actors
Based in Brussels, the EEAS relies on an extensive network of EU diplomatic presence 
worldwide and brings together European civil servants, diplomats from the foreign 
services of the EU Member States and local staff in countries around the world. The EEAS 
is specially in charge of the CSDP (Common Security and Defence Policy), which is an 
integral part of EU foreign policy. Since its implementation in 2003 and through its military 
operations and civilian missions, the CSDP has contributed to both global and regional 
security challenges. 
In the frame of this report, UN Peacekeeping missions are included in this use case, while they 
are not directly managed by EEAS. UN Peacekeeping missions help countries navigate the 
difficult path from conflict to peace. European Member States provide military and government/
administration personnel of their own national services to UN Peacekeeping missions.
Connected units and their use of secure SATCOM
A diversity of assets can take advantage of secure SATCOM. For every type of missions 
(election observation, UN, CSDP (Common Security and Defence Policy)), secure SATCOM 
can be used to connect EEAS mission HQ to Brussels and to staff in missions for centralised 
communications, information sharing and real-time monitoring.
In addition to HQs, different type of staff can also rely on secure SATCOM to exchange 
information/data in the frame of the EU External Action use case. Firstly, short-term 
observers (about two-thirds of the observers) and the long-term observers (about onethird of the observers) for election are the two types of observers deployed for every 
election observation missions. Satellite communication can definitively provide a reliable 
solution for collection of data, relevant on-time monitoring of the electoral process. Secure 
SATCOM can be used fixed for the stationary teams or mobile for the mobile observation 
teams. Secondly, the 18 CSDP missions and operations involve the deployment of around 
5000 people. Regarding the scope of CSDP missions, and in addition to HQ connectivity, 
deployed staff can rely on secure SATCOM to have continuous communication means at any 
time throughout the duration of the operation’s length. 
EU external action use case
Thirdly, the staff for UN Missions can be mentioned. Indeed, UN Peacekeeping missions is 
composed of military staff (staff officer and troops) from supporting national countries, but 
not only. Indeed, some UN Peacekeeping missions also include Formed Police units and 
Individual Police members.
Specially for UN and CSDP Missions, and based on national military forces, several types 
of other units can be connected. Can be quoted armoured personnel carrier (to transport 
troops), logistic vehicles, vessels, aircraft, helicopters, UAVs and mobile BGAN (Broadband 
Global Area Network) units to provide connectivity in case of emergencies.)
Satellite connectivity is estimated to be used as the primary connectivity as the operational 
areas of connected units can suffer a lack of relevant and secure terrestrial networks.
Dynamics and drivers of the demand
One key objective of EEAS, via the Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP), is to work 
towards strengthening the EU’s capacity to respond to security challenges and to consolidate 
its role as a global player. The global geopolitical stability has worsened in recent years, and 
as such EEAS promotes peaceful and democratic outcomes to longstanding crises. The 18 
CSDP missions and operations which are currently running continues to be an emblematic 
high visibility EU foreign policy tool to address crises around the world. 
Geographical coverage Worldwide with a focus on Africa
and Middle East
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 49
USE CASES PRESENTATION SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
Actors
Some of the EU Member States have deployed forces in external theatres over the last 
decade as part of national missions or international missions (such as under a NATO). 
Those operations usually involve the use of satellite communications (based on FSS or MSS 
capacity) either based on proprietary government satellites or third-party assets (such as 
systems managed by private commercial operators). EU Member States can also deploy 
forces in the future as part of European missions, such as the EU Rapid Deployment Capacity 
(EU RDC), as highlighted below.
In March 2022, the EU Member States have agreed on a common strategic course of 
action for security and defence towards a stronger and more capable European Union: the 
Strategic Compass (1). It is a guide for action and its unique value proposition is to act more 
quickly and decisively when facing crisis with the following commitments (1) Up to 5,000 
strong EU RDC; (2) Live exercises on land and at sea; (3) Enhance military mobility and (4) 
Reinforce CSDP missions and operations (CSDP missions and operations are part of EU 
external action use case, cf. page 48).
Connected units and their use of secure SATCOM
Different military units can use secure SATCOM and each one uses different types of 
terminals.
Land units: Based in the EU, the central command units (for every mission) are the central 
controlling entity which manage the missions from Europe. Satellite connectivity contributes 
by providing an independent, secure and autonomous link with the military deployment, 
wherever it is deployed. Theatre hubs provide HQ operations and connection in the 
operating area. Certain hubs can also correspond to long term, fixed installations of military 
bases outside Europe. 
In addition, deployed troops and staff can use Flyaway/manpack terminals. Any type of 
land vehicles (armoured or logistics ones) required by military forces are also equipped with 
secure SATCOM terminals. It is noteworthy to mention that MSS terminals also provide 
connectivity to troops and staff but with a lower data rate than the flyaway and manpack 
(the MSS terminal has a smaller size, too) (cf. page 32).
Piloted aero units: Different types of aircraft such as transport aircraft, combat aircraft, aircraft 
dedicated to special missions (such as ISR (intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance)) 
and helicopters are needed to support the forces missions.
Maritime units: The Maritime assets are partly the same as the ones used in the frame of the 
Maritime Surveillance use case (the profile of assets are similar).
Finally, this report is primarily focused on the future requirement for MALE (Medium Altitude 
Long Endurance) type UAVs, although other types of UAVs, tactical to HALE (High Altitude 
Long Endurance) type could be deployed and require satellite connectivity over the forecast 
period.
Dynamics and drivers of the demand
Different elements will lead to feed secure SATCOM demand. Firstly, the Strategic Compass is 
by itself a key driver for future demand. It estimated to lead to new investment, modernisation 
of forces, and new operations. Secondly, an increase in the data transmission requirement 
for essentially all of the terminals used by military forces is anticipated. Thirdly, Sensitivity 
to new and/or increasing threats, i.e. contested operations, jamming, cybersecurity (etc.) 
is estimated to result in a demand for more “secure” capabilities compared to traditional 
commercial satellite communication solutions.
Finally, the location of future threats, crises and operations is difficult to anticipate, as 
exemplified by the situation in Ukraine in 2022. As such, the ability to rapidly adapt, with an 
increasing level of flexibility and mobility is estimated to represent an important driver. The 
trend towards an increasing number of units equipped with a communication on the move 
capability is estimated to increase.
Forces deployment use case
Geographical coverage Worldwide with a focus on Africa
and Middle East
(1) European Commission. 2022. A Strategic Compass for Security and Defence.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 50
USE CASES PRESENTATION SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
Actors
EU Member States have various types of transport infrastructure on their territories and 
various entities manage transport infrastructure depending on the type of asset considered:
The European Organisation for the Safety of Air Navigation (Eurocontrol) manages air 
traffic and oversees collision avoidance between aircraft and all subjects related to Search 
and Rescue in case of an accident. In addition, Air Navigation Service Providers (ANSPs) 
manage traffic on a national level and can be either public or private.
The European Fisheries Control Agency (EFCA) consolidates information collected by 
Member States and regional organisations on the localization of fishing vessels to avoid 
illegal fishing. This information is then used by national fisheries inspection services to 
enforce regulations. On the other hand, the European Maritime Safety Agency (EMSA) 
collects data on vessels to provide them with continuous position and navigational safety 
information for safety purposes such as collision avoidance. 
When it comes to private and commercial land vehicles, some manufacturers will 
use secure SATCOM IoT in the coming years to monitor their clients’ assets in order to 
conduct predictive maintenance and improve the quality of their products. Lastly, railway 
operators will increasingly use information generated by their assets for optimization and 
management of traffic. ERA (EU Agency for Railways) will primarily devise the technical and 
legal framework to enable the removing technical barriers to this adoption.
Connected units and their use of secure SATCOM
Commercial and business aircraft must remain connected for navigation purposes during 
their whole flight time. Airplanes doing international or long flights will be more likely to be 
connected through satellite at some point.
Several types of vessels are connected through satellites, mainly due to national and 
international regulations. Usually, large and commercial ships are more subject to 
international regulations having them connected through satellites. On the other hand, 
fishing vessels of any size must be equipped with a VMS (Vessel Monitoring System), but it 
depends on the country they are registered in.
Trains and rail related assets such as railcars, passenger railway vehicles and locomotives 
mostly use terrestrial means of communication but some of them may be connected in the 
Transport infrastructures use case
future as operation management and optimization will need a continuous connectivity. This 
can be achieved only through satellites for trains crossing unpopulated regions.
Same as for trains, every land vehicle can possibly be connected through satellite for 
predictive maintenance and optimization. However, only the high-end of the market is 
expected to be connected through IoT in the coming years due to the price of the equipment.
Dynamics and drivers of the demand
Each of the transport infrastructure related assets considered are mainly connected in order 
to comply with regulations. Consequently, the primary growth driver of secure SATCOM 
connectivity is the implementation of new regulations either by national or international 
bodies overseeing traffic of vehicles and assets. It can come as a totally new regulation 
or an enlargement of the scope of existing ones, thus affecting more assets of a segment. 
Moreover, the increasing importance of safety and control over the vehicles will further 
increase the demand in the coming years. Another driver is the growth in the number of 
assets to be regulated due to an increase in the number of land vehicles, trains or aircraft 
travelling through the EU.
Geographical coverage
Depending on the type of assets: Global 
for vessels and aircraft, regional for 
trains and land vehicles.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 51
USE CASES PRESENTATION SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
Actors
The Space Infrastructure use case consists of four sub use-cases linked to the relevant 
program component: i) Copernicus, ii)Galileo & EGNOS, iii) SSA, and iv) a transversal use case 
concerning Ground Segment. Most of the data and information provided by Copernicus are 
made available to any citizens and organizations free of charge. Governmental users, such 
as Union institutions and bodies, European, national, regional or local authorities entrusted 
with the definition, implementation, enforcement or monitoring of a public service or policy, 
are core usesrs of the Copernicus.
The EDRS (European Data Relay System) represents the backbone infrastructure for the 
data transfer of Copernicus. 
The authorities that use the derived services are usually the ones responsible for the 
definition, implementation of a public service / policy in the following areas: Atmospheric 
monitoring, Marine environment monitoring, Land monitoring, Climate change, Emergency 
management (e.g. civil protection) and security (e.g. border guards). 
Finally, staff of the research sectors (universities or any other research and education 
establishment), charities, non-governmental organizations and international organizations 
are also interested in using COPERNICUS data for their various applications.
Connected units and their use of secure SATCOM
Secure SATCOM can be used to retrieve directly data from the satellites to the ground. 
Six Sentinel satellites were in service as of May 2022. Sentinel-1A and 1B provides allweather, day and night radar imagery for land and ocean services. Sentinel-1A was 
launched in 2014 and Sentinel-1B was launched in 2016. Sentinel-2A and 2B provides 
high-resolution optical imagery for land and emergency services. Sentinel-2A was launched 
in 2015 and Sentinel-2B was launched in 2017. Sentinel-3A and 3B provides highaccuracy optical, radar and altimetry data for marine and land services. Sentinel-3A was 
launched in 2016 and Sentinel-3B was launched in 2018. Sentinel-5 Precursor is dedicated 
to atmospheric composition monitoring, Sentinel-5P is a payload embarked on a MetOp 
Second Generation satellite. Sentinel-5P was launched in 2017.
Sentinel-6A provides data about surface of the oceans (waves, surface winds, sea level) 
used for short-term marine meteorology forecasts and measurements of evolution of the 
height of the oceans. Sentinel-6A was launched in 2020.
Dynamics and drivers of the demand
Six high-priority additional Sentinel missions are under development to address EU policy 
and gaps in Copernicus user needs and to expand the current capabilities of the Copernicus 
space component:
• CHIME: Copernicus Hyperspectral Imaging Mission.
• CIMR: Copernicus Imaging Microwave Radiometer.
• CO2M: Copernicus Anthropogenic Carbon Dioxide Monitoring.
• CRISTAL: Copernicus Polar Ice and Snow Topography Altimeter.
• LSTM: Copernicus Land Surface Temperature Monitoring.
• ROSE-L: Copernicus L-band Synthetic Aperture Radar.
They will help to address challenges such as urbanisation, food security, rising sea levels, 
diminishing polar ice, natural disasters and, of course, climate change(1). Such additional 
satellites and missions will reinforce the need for high volume of data to transfer in realtime.
Space infrastructures use case (Copernicus)
Geographical coverage Worldwide
(1) ESA. Copernicus Sentinel Expansion missions.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 52
USE CASES PRESENTATION SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
Actors
Galileo and EGNOS are the EU system components part of the European Global Navigation 
Satellite System (GNSS). 
Both programmes are managed by the European Commission with the support of 
EUSPA in specific aspects related to the operational management, security monitoring 
and accreditation as well as the development of the downstream market and integrated 
applications leveraging the components and their synergies. 
Galileo and EGNOS offer accurate and reliable Positioning, Timing and Velocity via the 
provision of several services to a broad range of users, from Consumer solutions, Mobility 
and Governmental applications as well. 
Connected units and their use of secure SATCOM
In both architectures of Galileo and EGNOS systems, three types of links exist:
• Internal links. For instance, between the Reference Monitoring Stations and the Central 
Facility of the system.
• External links serving as interface to other system providers (e.g. Galileo satellites host a 
SAR payload, which receives signals from users in an emergency situation).
• User links which includes ranging signals and data dissemination.
The use of secure SATCOM might contribute to the availability and reliability of the GNSS 
infrastructure and service provision, when it comes to transferring within the ground 
segment, with external providers and when disseminating data to the end-users.
EGNOS: The Reference Monitoring Stations are named RIMS (Remote Integrity Monitoring 
Stations) and the Central Facility is named CPF (Central Processing Facility). The CPF is a 
module of the MCC (Mission Control Centre) that uses the data received from the network 
of RIMS to compute the corrections and integrity of the message.
Galileo: The Reference Monitoring Stations are named GSS (Galileo Sensor Stations) and 
the Central Facility is named GMS (Galileo Mission Segment). The GMS is responsible for 
the determination and uplink of navigation data messages.
Dynamics and drivers of the demand
The number of ground stations (both RIMS and GSS) are forecast to increase in order to 
provide enhanced accuracy or higher reactivity for Safety of Life applications. This increase 
is the main driver of the demand growth, for both EGNOS and Galileo.
Space infrastructures use case (EGNOS & Galileo)
Geographical coverage Worldwide
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 53
USE CASES PRESENTATION SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
Space infrastructures use case (SSA & ground segment)
Actors
SSA (Space Situation Awareness) is the EU Space programme component dealing with 
detection, tracking and cataloguing of space objects to determine their orbits and predict 
future collisions, fragmentations and re-entry events of satellites and/or debris. 
Space debris is one of the principal threats to satellites and it is estimated that 750,000 
debris objects larger than 1 cm orbit around the Earth. After launch and deployment into 
orbit, space debris is often the next highest risk to a satellite mission. Space sustainability –
and by extension, SSA/STM- are topics which are garnering increasing attention worldwide 
by both government and private sector actors.
European national governments have developed communication programmes for both 
military and governmental needs. As most of those space systems are linked to sovereign 
needs, satellite communications could be used as a backup solutions to exchange data in 
the frame of the ground segment infrastructure.
Connected units and their use of secure SATCOM
In the frame of SSA, satellite communications could be used:
• as a backup connection for the users.
• to transmit data from and interconnect the ground-based sensors.
• for access to the space-based sensors (deployed on space assets) for the TCR (Telemetry, 
Command and Ranging).
For miliary/governmental satellite system, secure SATCOM could provide the sovereignty, 
level and guarantee needed to exchange data in the frame of the Ground Segment 
infrastructure.
Geographical coverage Worldwide
Dynamics and drivers of the demand
The EU SST network is comprising of sensors to survey and track objects in all orbital 
regimes (LEO, MEO, HEO and GEO). The network relies on different types of sensors such 
as radars, telescopes and laser ranging stations. As part of the EUS Space Progarmme , 
EU SST will continue to provide operational services related to surveillance and tracking of 
space objects that orbit the Earth, while expanding its user base and developing additional 
services aimed at improving the safety and sustainability of space activities in the frame of 
the Space Traffic Management (STM) initiative. Currently more than 130 organizations are 
receiving these services and more than 240 European satellites are safeguarded from the 
risk of collision.(1)
Several European countries have long-standing national communications programmes 
managed by their armed forces. While France was the first European country to operate 
such dedicated assets, Luxembourg, Italy, Spain and Germany have also deployed their firstgeneration systems during the last decade. Those systems currently offer a combination of 
frequency bands to serve military requirements.
Certain systems also support certain civil requirements, and/or have agreed to make capacity 
available to partner countries and organisations. Considering the current status, three 
countries in the EU have either recently launched new generation systems (France with 
Syracuse-4A and Syracuse-4B) or plan to launch these in the next three to four years (Italy, 
Spain). The German government’s current satellites (COMSATbw-2A and COMSATbw-2B) 
is estimated to reach their end of life before the end of this decade, and they plan to invest 
in successor programmes.
(1) https://www.eusst.eu/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/eu-sst-leaflet.pdf.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 54
USE CASES PRESENTATION SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
Actors
EU Representations Offices: EU Delegations are a huge strategic asset for the European 
Union and the achievement of a more coherent, visible and effective external action. Indeed, 
EU Delegations are reportedly the primary source of political information on a given country 
context for European Commission (Brussels). They are hybrid administrative constructs that 
combine diplomatic tasks and operational tasks (as development cooperation and trade). 
EU Delegations are also responsible for coordinating and chairing EU working groups and 
meeting in third countries.(1)
National diplomacy: In addition to their national duties, the diplomatic missions of European 
member states work in a close relationship with EU Delegations. Indeed, both diplomatic 
representations have to coordinate to ensure the external representation of EU foreign policy 
with third countries and multilateral organisations. Moreover, EU Delegations can provide 
complementary support to Member States in their role to provide protection to EU citizens.
ECHO field offices: The EU Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations department 
has been providing assistance to people in need (both Civil protection and Humanitarian 
Aid) since 1992. The presence of field humanitarian staff across the world enables the 
Commission to have an up-to-date overview of humanitarian needs in a given country or 
region, which enables the better development of intervention strategies and policy.
Connected units and their use of secure SATCOM
European Institutional organisations mainly use terrestrial networks. However, satellite 
communications are generally used by institutional organisations either as a back-up solution 
(when terrestrial means cannot provide the relevant level of Quality of Service) or when 
security of the communication cannot be guaranteed due to the dependency to any local (or 
any third-party) entity. The European Union, its organisations and the Member States, are 
in charge of critical missions requiring guaranteed, secured and resilient communications 
means. Some of the regions of strategic interest to the EU (as the Polar, the Atlantic and Africa 
regions) lack connectivity infrastructure. Moreover, embassies, consulates (or any diplomatic 
representations) are at the forefront of any crisis to lead and manage the required actions. 
Satellite connectivity is estimated to then be used as the primary connectivity option.
Secure SATCOM represents a vital technology for various institutions that need to maintain 
reliable and confidential communication channels in different scenarios. Some examples of 
such entities are:
• EU Representations Offices: secure SATCOM can be used to provide a secure and 
autonomous communication means between Brussels HQ to the EU Delegations; even if 
many responsibilities have been transferred from Brussels HQ to the EU Delegation over 
the last 20 years.
• National Embassies: Similar to the EU Representations Offices, national embassies also 
need secure and autonomous connectivity system. Not only to interact with their national 
country but also to interact with EU Delegations.
• ECHO Field Office: Connectivity is not only needed for the ECHO Field Office. ECHO 
has also to rely on both international experts and national staff members to carry out 
their mission dedicated to providing governmental aid in preparation for or immediate 
aftermath of a disaster in Europe and worldwide.
Institutional communications use case is estimated to be one of the three major contributors 
for the secure SATCOM capacity demand.
Dynamics and drivers of the demand
The trend for Institutional Communications use case is similar to the one observed for the 
EU External Actions use case (cf. page 48). The EU Delegation, national embassies and 
ECHO are all at the heart of the EU external action. The geopolitical context, cyber and 
hybrid threats further prompt security and resilience concerns. It significantly increases 
the need for a guaranteed and secure access to communications means for all diplomatic 
activities in an unrestricted manner.
Institutional communications use case
Geographical coverage Worldwide
(1) ECDPM. 2014. A closer look into EU’s external action frontline: framing the challenges ahead for EU Delegations, March 14th.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 55
USE CASES PRESENTATION SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
Other Critical Infrastructures use case
Actors
The other critical infrastructures use case includes the sites which – due to the nature of 
their activities (both industrial and financial) – require a guaranteed, reliable and secured 
communication link as a back-up.
There are many critical infrastructure/industrial sites operated by European private and 
public entities which require secure and resilient communication links. In the frame of the 
report, we decided to focus on key sites of:
• Industry & Energy infrastructure: SEVESO Sites, Nuclear power plants and coal-fired 
power stations.
• Financial infrastructure: European Central Bank and National central banks.
• Data Centre: Data Centres with high data rate required. Satellite communications can be 
used as a backup solution to increase the resilience of the data transmission to and from 
the site where it is located.
Connected units and their use of secure SATCOM
Whatever the connected unit, satellites are able to offer a reliable and guaranteed continuous communications in case of a major accident.
A SEVESO site is defined as an industrial site which pose major risks due to their activity which 
include the handling, the manufacturing, the use or the storage of hazardous substances 
such as oil depots for instance. SEVESO is the name of an Italian city where a major industrial 
accident happened in 1976. SEVESO name was given to a European directive in 1982 which 
aims to limit the risks of industrial accidents and their consequences. The second element 
considered in the frame of Industry & Energy infrastructure are nuclear power plants. Here, 
we refer to the ones used for electricity generation but definitively exclude the nuclear 
elements covered by relevant nuclear legislation (treaties and Community Law).
Thirdly, the coal-fired power stations which burn coal to produce electricity. Even if their 
number in Europe is forecast to decrease over the coming decade, they pose a major 
industrial risk and need to have reliable and guaranteed means of communication whenever 
is necessary.
At a financial infrastructure level, the European Central Bank is the central bank of the 19 
European Union countries which use the Euro. We also include the Central Bank of every 
European Member state.
Finally, Data Centre covers a diversity of needs such as State institutions and energy 
undertaking or General Healthcare System. They require data rates greater than 100 Mpbs.
Such critical elements mostly need low-latency satellite capacity through secure SATCOM.
Dynamics and drivers of the demand
Industrial risks are more and more taken into account at legislation level (cf. the rise of 
SEVESO sites during the past decade). In December 2021, the European Commission is 
preparing to classify nuclear as a green energy, paving the way to a continual use of nuclear 
energy(1).
Banking sector – and especially the European and National infrastructure – are strategic 
assets for the European Union. It is not expected the number of those entities increase in 
the coming decade but their need for reliable, secure and guaranteed communication means 
would increase.
Digital transformation of both the EU economy and society is accelerating and the digital 
information infrastructure as well. Among them, data centres are key for their contribution 
to resilience, to EU data protection and confidentiality standards. Their use is expected to 
rise in the coming decade. An illustration of which is the European Union investigation to 
improve the energy efficiency and circular economy performance in cloud computing and 
data centres(2).
(1) Toute l’Europe. 2023. Energie nucléaire: quells sontles principaux pays producteurs en Europe, June 15th. 
(2) European Commission. Green cloud and green data centres. Shaping Europe’s digital future.
Geographical coverage European Union
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 56
USE CASES PRESENTATION SECURE SATCOM MARKET: DEMAND
Polar regions use case
Actors
In Polar Regions use case, we consider Arctic regions (for what it may concerns in the 
report, Polar regions means Arctic). We refer to Polar as the territories located above 60°N 
in the EU. This includes Finland and Sweden. Denmark is not included, except Greenland 
and the Faroe Islands (as their latitude is above 60°N). When part of the territory is located 
below 60°N (true for both countries), secure SATCOM connected units and total demand are 
for areas located above 60°N.
National players in Finland, Sweden (plus Greenland and Faroe Islands):
• Government organisations: Includes government offices, first responders (firefighter 
stations and police stations) and coast guards.
• Public institutions: Includes hospitals staff, dentist, physician offices, nursing/residential 
care facilities, teachers and students.
• Scientific research institutes: Includes wildlife observation, climate research and 
community studies in the Polar regions.
EU players: This includes commission representations and offices of the European Union 
External Action in the Polar member states, and decentralised agencies that aim to contribute 
to the implementation of EU policies. EU players also include EU agencies with activities in the 
Polar including FRONTEX (for border control), EFCA (fisheries regulations) and EU-PolarNet 
(European Polar research programme). The EU’s updated Arctic policy (published on October 
13, 2021) aims to help preserve the Polar areas as regions of peaceful cooperation, to slow 
the effects of climate change, and to support the sustainable development of Polar regions to 
the benefit of Polar communities, not least Indigenous Peoples, and future generations.
Connected units and their use of secure SATCOM
Terrestrial telecommunications infrastructure in the Polar regions remains sparse or inexistent 
in some areas. Considering the small addressable market and high operational costs, service 
providers and telecom operators are generally reticent to provide broadband services in 
Polar regions. Moreover, the existing networks are heterogeneous, seldom meeting the 
required speed and latency of today’s operational needs. Satellite communications are a 
relevant way to provide a minimum level of communications, notably for highly sensitive 
activities (e.g. medicine, law enforcement, coast guards).
The Healthcare institutions (hospitals, dentist and physician offices, nursing and residential 
care facilities as well as medical and diagnostic labs) can benefit from the advantages of 
secure SATCOM. Connectivity requirements for telemedicine, complete Internet access and 
backups to terrestrial links. For schools, secure SATCOM can be used for e-learning, intranets 
and complete Internet access. For Government offices, secure SATCOM can be used as 
a backup solution to a terrestrial network in case of a failure or to divert over extended 
terrestrial networks during peak hours. Border and Coast guards have a wide variety of 
assets deployed including Aircraft carriers, Submarines, Amphibious, Frigate/Destroyer, 
Mine countermeasures, Patrol, and Auxiliary vessels. All those assets can be equipped with 
relevant terminals for satellite connectivity. Finally, secure SATCOM can also be the unique 
connectivity mean for EU offices (including offices of decentralised agencies, of commission 
representations, and of the EU External Action) and staff involved in EU missions in the 
Polar regions to support activities such as research, border control.
Dynamics and drivers of the demand
In addition to the increasing demand for high bandwidth applications (such as video 
conferencing and video streaming) by the Polar population, secure SATCOM is needed to 
connect the governmental actors to fulfil EU and National policies. The national policies are 
not only fulfilled by countries in Polar regions but also by other EU players.
More generally, Polar regions has been a region of growing environmental, commercial, 
military and strategic interest for many nations (U.S., Russia, China …). Secure SATCOM 
can provide resilient communication system capable of supporting the interests in those 
geographical areas.
Geographical coverage Polar
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 57
SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY
© wirestock.com
SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM SUPPLY 58
SECURE SATCOM GOVERNMENTAL SUPPLY 63
SECURE SATCOM COMMERCIAL SUPPLY 69
Chapter Summary
After having presented the secure SATCOM market in terms of use cases, demand 
capacity forecast (Mbps) and business models, this chapter introduces the supply of 
secure SATCOM services and the factors that influence it. It helps to understand how 
the satellite-based connectivity market is changing and growing from a supply point 
of view, as well as the main technologies, actors, and dynamics that are transforming 
it. It also helps to understand the existing and planned governmental and commercial 
satellite systems that would provide secure SATCOM services. The chapter covers the 
following topics:
• The selected dynamics and drivers of secure SATCOM supply that are shaping the 
market. It identifies several technology drivers that are transforming the satellitebased connectivity ecosystem and the estimated impacts of these changes for 
secure SATCOM in the EU.
• The supply by geographical areas for secure SATCOM services. It is presented with 
two categories of countries: Category I (EU member states) and Category II (nonEU countries with strategic interest or partnership with EU). It also discusses some 
additional key drivers for governmental supply of secure SATCOM services.
• The trends for the capacity supply from Category I and Category II countries for 
governmental satellite systems and commercial GEO and NGSO systems over the 
2025–2040 period. It presents some potential dynamics over 2025–2040 while 
providing some key players and case studies that will be instrumental to the future 
supply of secure SATCOM.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 58
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM SUPPLY SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY
Introduction
When it comes to secure SATCOM capacity and assets owned by organisations based 
within the EU, the landscape can be summarised by GEO and MEO/LEO orbits.
The capacity from assets located in geostationary orbit:
• is estimated to be available in essentially all of the major frequency bands being used 
to support voice and data streams, with the possibility to support various activities. 
It is noteworthy that those assets belong to either national government or private 
organisations with a different ability to access to such capacity.
• is available depending on the location. Most systems offer capacity covering all of 
European Union and/or a larger part (or at least all of Europe by combining several 
of them). Coverage can then vary depending on the locations outside the European 
Union.
The capacity from assets located in MEO and LEO orbit:
• is currently available through a single constellation of satellites, such as SES’s O3b, 
operating in the MEO orbit, and in a single frequency band. The new spacecraft for the 
second generation of the system have started to be launched from December 2022 
and the enhanced service is estimated to be available from Q4 2023.
• is not available from LEO orbit yet. Additional LEO systems are currently planned and/
or under development, at least for the supply of IoT capabilities. 
A single constellation consisting of 3 GEO spacecraft, or less than 10 MEO spacecraft, or 
at least several hundreds LEO spacecraft, can provide a sufficient worldwide coverage and 
services (except for Polar areas in case of GEOs and MEOs).
Finally, it is noteworthy to mention that the necessary secure SATCOM capacity is highly 
dependent on use cases and associated specific operation/mission. For example, Data 
Center (in the frame of Other Critical Infrastructures use case) would require high data links 
of more than 100 Mbps, potentially increasing to 500 Mbps over the forecast period to 
2040.
Frequency band Frequencies Applications
Possible “Broadband Connectivity”
Protected EHF 
(Extremely High 
Frequency)
30 GHz to 300 GHz For military applications.
V band 40 GHz to 75 GHz Video and data.
Inter-satellite links.
Q band 33 GHz to 50 GHz Video and data.
Inter-satellite links.
Ka band 27 GHz to 40 GHz Video and data.
(Military applications for part 
of the spectrum named Mil Ka 
band).
Ku band 12 GHz to 18 GHz Video and data.
X band 8 GHz to 12 GHz Mainly used for military 
applications.
C band 4 GHz to 8 GHz Video and data.
“Narrowband”
S band 2 GHz to 4 GHz S-band supports applications 
such as deep space 
communications, weather radar 
and ship radar.
L band 1.2 GHz to 1.8 GHz L-band supports GNSS as 
well as satellite mobile phones 
enabling sea, land and air 
communications.
UHF (Ultra High 
Frequency) band
0.300 GHz to 1 GHz UHF is used for mobile 
communication and 
meteorological satellites.
Overview of SATCOM frequency bands
Note: C-, Ku- and Ka-band are the most common frequency-band used in SATCOM, including secure SATCOM, by now. Higher frequency 
bands (such as Q/V-band) tend to favour broadband connectivity due to the larger spectrum available, leading to higher throughputs. In 
the meantime, higher frequency bands tend to be more sensitive to weather conditions such as rain, clouds and fog.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 59
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM SUPPLY SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY
Technological drivers transforming the secure satellite-based connectivity
Several structural drivers have started to transform and largely increase the volume of capacity offered through satellite assets. These will likely also impact the capacity and services 
available for secured connectivity. Overall, digital technologies are at the heart of this transformation alongside the use of higher frequency bands and other features. Ultimately, the benefits 
will likely go in three directions:
• An increase in the volume of available capacity.
• A higher flexibility in the ability to dynamically allocate the capacity and design of services.
• A higher cost efficiency of satellite assets.
While several drivers are estimated to apply in the coming decade, it is important to keep in mind that the visibility on several impacts, including on the implementation of current and 
emerging technologies in operational networks, is significantly higher for the next three to five years and tentatively to the end of this decade. It is important to bear in mind that most 
programmes can require a minimum of three to five years to become operational networks (including GEO and NGSO assets) with potential longer development time for complex systems 
and/or complex infrastructure. Examples of these would be:
• The development time for government (in particular military) satellite systems will often take a longer time due to the complexity of the system and the need to develop unique security 
features.
• The development of at least the first generation of NGSO constellations have to date required more than five years, from the inception of the programmes to the start of commercial 
services. This currently applies to projects (outside European Union) such as Starlink and OneWeb that already started their commercial operations. The reasons for the development time 
includes the need to develop new manufacturing process (including new factories for the mentioned projects), the time to raise the required financing, the manufacturing and deployment 
time and other aspects. 
XXXX
Some future innovation and deployment cycles already identified 
As for any technology, new space-based connectivity solutions can be subjects to certain limits and/or require cycles of adoptions. For instance, the need to deploy new terminals, either 
because the new networks make use of new frequency bands, or because their design (e.g. a NGSO network) requires a fast-tracking antenna. 
The specific requirements of secure connectivity should also be considered, with the need to either validate existing solutions or to adapt them to the user requirement. One example can 
be found in the observed trends associated with the use of software defined and/or cloud solutions. 
The existing and future secure connectivity programmes will have to meet the user requirements while also trying to take profit from the existing and upcoming solutions. As mentioned 
before, the use of software defined and/or cloud solutions is a clear technological trend which will increasingly impact space-based connectivity. 
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 60
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM SUPPLY SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY
An adaptation of the worldwide SATCOM ecosystem
XXXX
Satellite connectivity ecosystem is changing
The worldwide satellite connectivity market is subject to significant future changes, 
triggered by the ongoing technology advances and their impact on industry operations 
and economics. It is useful to summarize the most important global changes impacting the 
commercial satellite ecosystem, including vertical integration, presence of new entrants and 
a potential consolidation. Secure SATCOM, as a part of SATCOM, is logically impacted by 
such evolution.
A trend toward vertical integration exists, where satellite network operators get more 
involved into the management of capacity and the delivery of satellite services. This vertical 
integration can go in two directions: Firstly, certain service companies can progressively 
acquire satellite systems in order to provide an end-to-end capability. Examples of such 
organisations include Hughes Network Systems (U.S.), Viasat (U.S.), and more recently 
Anuvu (Canada). The graph on the right illustrates the vertical integration trend, where 
different players - rather than occupying a single segment begin to move up and/or down 
the value chain-. Secondly, wholesale operators develop managed capacity and service 
capabilities. Examples include SES, Eutelsat, Intelsat, Telenor, Hispasat etc. These can be 
either based on organic investments, and/or involve the acquisition of third-party companies. 
This vertical integration tends to be organized in a tactical way, and the level of integration 
can vary depending on the vertical segment. 
More than half of the operators of NGSO satellite broadband constellations correspond 
to  new entrants in the satellite connectivity ecosystem. While the EU operators have 
made  an early move to launch their NGSO (SES + Eutelsat/OneWeb), upcoming NGSO 
projects seem to occur outside of the EU. The new projects have also branched out into 
innovative space and ground solutions. 
(*) Excluding fully vertically integrated companies
Note: Defence users often act as the secured SATCOM operators and provide the secured SATCOM services to the armed forces directly 
"in house", rather than outsourcing this to commercial entities.
Satellite connectivity ecosystem – dynamics
Network operation 
and raw capacity 
supply
Operators Service 
companies(*)
Cloud solution 
suppliers
Ground segment 
supply (*)
Managed capacity
Value added 
service layers
Hardware logistics, 
installation and 
maintenance 
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 61
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM SUPPLY SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY
An adaptation of the worldwide SATCOM ecosystem (continued)
Several large tech companies offering cloud solutions have started to take position in the 
satellite data and connectivity market, as there is an expected increased use of cloud solutions 
in SATCOM service provision. Such companies include the Amazon Group and AWS, 
Microsoft, and Google, with several partnership announcements since 2021. We anticipate 
that those groups (whose HQs are not based in the EU) will significantly increase their 
involvement in the coming years. An ongoing trend is the installation of satellite antennas 
in data centre sites in order to provide direct access to the resources of the associated data 
centres to data and/or connectivity clients. 
A potential consolidation led by historical market leaders is likely to be reinforced. In order 
to benefit from economies of scale and/or to acquire new capabilities, several incumbent 
operators and service companies have either been involved in transactions or announced 
publicly that an industry consolidation could make sense. As examples of recent transactions:
• Eutelsat and OneWeb decided to combine their activities; the transaction was closed 
in Q3 2023.
• The service provider Marlink acquired in 2020-2021 ITC Global, a  subsidiary of 
Panasonic, as well as the land service activities of Anuvu.
• Viasat (U.S.) finalized the acquisition Inmarsat (U.K.) on the 31st of May 2023. This 
transaction will significantly impact the operations of the two organisations. 
• In December 2020, Intelsat (U.S.) completed its acquisition of the Commercial Aviation 
business of Gogo (U.S.). On the 13th of July 2021, the Gogo name was dropped.
• Ground segment supplier ST Engineering iDirect (Singapore) acquired Newtec 
(Belgium) in 2019.
• In December 2018, the service provider Speedcast (U.S.) acquired Globcomm (U.S.).
Key impacts for secure SATCOM in the EU
EU based space 
companies could be 
acquired by non-EU 
organisations
In view of the ongoing consolidation dynamics, the 
possibility to see certain EU suppliers being acquired by 
non-European organisations seems likely. In this case, it 
will be more sensitive when considering large network 
operators and/or technology companies.
Involvement of cloud 
suppliers is estimated to 
increase
Cloud solution suppliers will take an increasing role 
in the connectivity ecosystem. Their role, either in 
the management of satellite network, and/or for the 
management of end user data will have to be considered 
within secure SATCOM solutions, especially if such cloud 
suppliers are non-EU companies.
A living ecosystem to 
support secure SATCOM
Technology disruption will result in the presence of 
new entrants as well as in the adaptation of existing 
organisations. As such, any programme for secure 
SATCOM would have to enable the participation of new 
organisations over time.
Digitalisation of the 
SATCOM network
Digital disruption impacts of the space ecosystem: 
space and ground segment, ground station and satellite 
communication services.
Coping with such a  digital revolution will require 
a significant and continuous R&D effort from European 
Industry.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 62
OVERVIEW OF THE SECURE SATCOM SUPPLY SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY
Considered geographical areas
As mentioned on page 58, secure SATCOM capacity/services can be provided from assets belonging to either national government organisations (Governmental supply) or to private 
organisations (Commercial supply).
XXXX
Geographical distribution for Governmental supply
The geographical distribution used (in order to categorise the origin of the capacity, relying on the system owner), can be separated into three primary categories :
• Category I: Countries which are a European Union Member States.
• Category II: Countries which are not part of Category I countries, but which have extended relationship with European Union : United Kingdom, Norway, Canada and Switzerland.
• Category III: Countries with are neither part of Category I, nor part of Category II. Category III countries are shared into the following sub-categories: Sub-category III.1: North America 
– Sub-category III.2: Latin America and Caribbean – Sub-category III.3: Middle East and Africa – Sub-category III.4: Asia.
The definition of geographical distribution for Governmental supply is used from page 64 to page 68. 
XXXX
Geographical coverage for Commercial supply
The geographical distribution for the analysis has been grouped into three categories:
• Category I: Satellite Commercial Operators which have their Tax residence, Management and Operational Facilities in a European Union Member State.
• Category II: Satellite Commercial Operators which are not part of Category I countries, but which have their Tax residence, Management and Operational Facilities in a country which 
has extended relationship with European Union: United Kingdom, Norway, Canada and Switzerland.
• Category III: Satellites which are neither part of Category I, nor part of Category II. 
XXXX
The definition of geographical distribution for Commercial supply is used from page 69 to page 74. 
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 63
SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY
Typical GEO government payload profile and enabled data rate
For GEO government owned systems, various types of payloads are expected to be deployed up to 2040. If Ka-band is expected to represent a significant share of the payloads, the move 
to high-frequency-band is estimated to lead to the deployment of payloads in Q/V-band and optical payloads. Such payloads are mainly expected in the next decade.
(1) Typical enabled total data rate for a GEO government owned system. Data relay is not included here.
(2) Based on satellites under procurement for which information is available.
(3) Includes several types of high frequency-band.
(4) Primarily “military” Ka-band. One satellite launched in the last decade (Athena-Fidus) also makes use of the “civilian/commercial” Ka-band spectrum.
Legend: The darker the blue, the higher the quantity of payloads are estimated to be deployed.
Typical enabled data rate (Gbps)(1) ~0.5 Gbps ~1.5-3 Gbps(2) ~15-30 Gbps(2)
Optical links
EHF ; Q/V etc. …(3)
Ka-band(4)
X-band
UHF
2010–2020 2020–2030 2030–2040
SECURE SATCOM GOVERNMENTAL SUPPLY 
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 64
SECURE SATCOM GOVERNMENTAL SUPPLY SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY
Overview of the governmental satellite systems in Cat I and Cat II
XXXX
European national government will likely continue to increase 
their capacity through modernisation programmes
Several European countries have long-standing national communication programmes 
managed by their armed forces. While France was the first country to operate such 
dedicated assets, other European Member States including Luxembourg, Italy, Spain and 
Germany deployed their first-generation systems during the last decade. 
Those systems currently offer a  combination of frequency bands, to serve military 
requirements from their respective countries. Certain categories of them also support some 
civil requirements, and/or have agreed to make capacity available to partner countries and 
organisations. 
While two joint satellite programmes were developed between France and Italy (AthenaFidus and Sicral), the difficulties of aligning programme priorities and schedules amongst 
other factors, has resulted in all countries investing to date in proprietary assets for their 
next generation programmes. Since 2019, Greece has an operational Governmental Satellite 
Communication system (“GreeCom”) connecting Ministries, Parliament, Embassies and civil 
protection authorities.
Considering the current status, three countries in the EU have either recently launched new 
generation systems (such as France with Syracuse-4A and -4B) or plan to launch these in 
the short term (Italy, Spain). Others, whose current satellites are estimated to reach their 
end of life before the end of this decade, will likely invest in a successor program. 
Overall, we observe that new generation assets have come with new capabilities, going in 
the direction of more broadband capability and in more flexible assets. Overall, information 
available on new generation assets suggest that they will have at least three times more 
capacity, as estimated for the Syracuse-4 satellites (at least the 4A and 4B)(1). 
XXXX
Capacity sharing mechanisms to support government 
requirements
National governments have been long term users of commercial satellite capacity to support 
their operations. 
At the European level, the European Defence Agency (EDA) established the EU SATCOM 
Market mechanism, now supported by 34 contributing members. Total orders in the pool 
have reached +675 SATCOM orders and €80.2 million over the 2012–2022 period. In 2022, 
the second framework contracts for communication and information system services were 
awarded to Airbus Defence and Space and Thales SIX(2). 
More recent initiatives have included work on the design of GOVSATCOM Hubs, that will be 
in charge of monitoring and ensuring the overall capacity and service planning as well as the 
security of the overall system (cf. page 12).
Other mechanisms found internationally can include partner countries in a  government 
programme, in particular the WGS (Wideband Global SATCOM) programme in the U.S., 
and the procurement of capacity by NATO to support the operations of the Alliance. 
As mentioned in the Regulation (EU) 2023/588 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of the 15th of March 2023, IRIS2 shall complement and expand the existing and 
future capacities of the GOVSATCOM component of the Union Space programme.(3)
(1) Opex360.com, February 2023: Télécommunications par satellite : La Marine nationale a reçu ses premières stations navales Syracuse IV
(2) EDA, 2022: EU SATCOM Market Factsheet
(3) Regulation (EU) 2023/588 of the European Parliament and of the Council of the 15th of March 2023, establishing the Union Secure Connectivity programme for the period 2023-2027, OJ L 79, 17.3.2023, p. 1–39. 
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 65
SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY
Additional trends for governmental supply
The following table provides a selection of key drivers for the supply of secure SATCOM capacity by government satellite systems. This comes as an addition to the generic technology 
drivers presented at the beginning of this chapter. 
SECURE SATCOM GOVERNMENTAL SUPPLY 
(1) USSF, February 2022: Wideband Global Satellite Communications Program completes major milestone in development of WGS-11+ Satellite }and Ground System
(2) Northrop Grumman, September 2020: ESS program will interoperate with and eventually replace the Space Force’s AEHF system
New generation 
governemental systems 
under development for 
several European countries
Most governments in the EU that currently own and/or operate government communication satellite systems, including France, Germany, Italy and 
Spain, are currently investing in new generation programmes. Those new generation systems are estimated to have extended capabilities, while 
offering continuity in the ability to use the frequency bands available on the previous generation. Target launch dates are spanning through this decade. 
Those assets are primarily in the GEO orbit and make use of the “military” frequency bands. Based on programme cycles, where new generation 
systems have been deployed on a ten to fifteen-year basis, a successor generation is estimated to be deployed in the 2030–2040 time period to replace 
and augment the current assets.
Investment in new 
capabilities observed 
internationally
On a global scale, investments in new generation capabilities are being observed in most parts of the world:
• In the U.S., new confirmed satellite programmes for the U.S. defence sector include for example the WGS-11 satellite(1). The ESS (Evolved Strategic 
Satellite) programme will also commence in the next decade and will eventually replace the AEHF (Advanced Extreme High Frequency Satellite) 
network(2). In addition, a  numąber of maintenance and modernisation programmes are being organized in order to both maintain current user 
terminals in operating conditions but also to develop new networks. 
• A number of other countries have recently procured, and/or have announced their intention to work on new generation systems. a non-exhaustive 
list includes the Australia, Brazil, Egypt, Japan, Korea, Qatar, the UAE, U.K. 
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 66
SECURE SATCOM GOVERNMENTAL SUPPLY SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY
Additional trends for governmental supply (continued)
(1) NSR, February 2023: it is official, WGS 12 is on its way 
Certain European countries 
are partners and/or 
users of government 
programmes
While Luxembourg was the only one country in the EU to launch its first national government communication in the last decade (i.e. Luxembourg) 
and while no concrete plan has been announced to date for the remaining countries that do not own such satellites, it is noteworthy that a number of 
countries have either invested and/or make use of international programmes to support their government communication requirement. 
• A first example is the U.S. WGS satellite programme, which includes a set of international partners. Partner countries in the EU include Denmark, 
Luxembourg and the Netherlands(1).
• Initiatives have been started at the EU level. The current operational mechanism is mainly the procurement of the assets by the governmental entity, 
while other mechanisms have been explored such as through a service contract or Pooling & Sharing (cf. page 12 with the GOVSTCOM Hubs).
Change in user 
requirement playing part in 
new asset deployment
Operations conducted by civil and defence forces have changed significantly in just the past decade. Taking several examples: 
• Defence missions conducted in external theatres have required a higher focus on mobility and flexibility, in view of the large operation theatres, and 
of the nature of the threats. 
• In the EU, activities related to border surveillance have significantly increased, requiring a more active monitoring of both the maritime and land areas.
• The increasing use of certain new assets, such as RPAS (Remotely Piloted Aircraft System), have resulted in new and/or changing requirements.
Those changes have had (and will continue to have) an impact on the design on new government satellite assets, with for example a stronger focus on 
mobile communications enabled by the upcoming satellite systems. 
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 67
SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY
Governmental supply from Cat I countries (2025–2040)
XXXX
Situation up to 2025
The governmental supply for secured SATCOM from Category I countries mainly relies on 
GEO satellites until 2025. Overall, the total government satellites operated are estimated to 
remain relatively stable at around 9.
New generation systems will also offer continuity and/or an increase in the supply of 
frequency bands including Ka-, Mil Ka-, UHF and X-band. The capacity additions up to 
2025 are estimated to primarily result from the launch of Syracuse-4A (launched in October 
2021) and Syracuse-4B (launched in July 2023) by France. The Italian Sicral 3A satellite is 
estimated to enter into service around 2026(1). The Spanish satellites Spainsat-NG1 and 
Spainsat-NG2, to be operated by Hisdesat for the Spanish government, are estimated to be 
launched in 2024–2025(2). 
XXXX
Evolution over the 2025–2040 period
Over the 2025–2030 time period, four satellites are estimated to reach their theoretical 
End Of Life (EOL): COMSATbw-2A and COMSATbw-2B, Athena-Fidus and Sicral-2. 
In  the meantime, four satellites are under procurement, including Spainsat-NG2, Sicral3A, Sicral-3B. In addition, the Italian Space Agency announced in 2019 the procurement 
of an Ital-GOVSATCOM satellite as a  contribution to the EU GOVSATCOM initiative(3). 
We also anticipate the procurement of at least replacement capacity for the two German 
COMSAT bw satellites. The new satellites are estimated to offer more capacity than their 
predecessors, largely through the addition of Ka-band capacity. Capacity is estimated to 
typically be up to several Gbps. 
Over the following decade, a  new generation of assets is estimated to be deployed to 
replace and augment the capacity deployed in the early 2020s, as it is anticipated that the 
connectivity requirement of the national governments will increase. While new countries 
may consider the launch of national systems, the probability is considered as relatively 
limited. While completely new architectures shall be considered, including the use of smaller 
assets in different orbits, we currently consider that the investment in anchor large capacity 
GEO systems is likely to stay, in view also of the orbital positions and spectrum available. 
With regards to NGSO, the cost to benefit from proprietary global broadband connectivity 
seems excessive against the requirement of individual countries. 
New generation assets are estimated to have more capacity, either due to the use of new 
frequency bands, of higher power and/or of new optimization techniques, to an increase in 
the number of beams etc. We also would like to highlight the widespread introduction of 
optical payloads over the next decade. They will be dedicated to specific applications, but 
will bring broadband capacity as well.
It is noteworthy to mention that New Space actors bring innovative and cost-effective 
solutions at a  high pace, which could contribute to a  potential move of Governmental/
Defence entities to purchase services from commercial entities instead of relying solely on 
their own, custom-designed space infrastructure. 
SECURE SATCOM GOVERNMENTAL SUPPLY 
KEY UNDERLYING ASSUMPTIONS for 2025–2040
• Owners of the major Government and Defence systems will renew their assets in the 
two coming decades.
• Relying on technological upgrades to counter new threats, new space assets will 
offer more capacity per asset.
• Part of the capacity needs can move to lower orbits (advantages of NGSO vs. GEO).
• None or only a  few new countries from Category I would invest in a  dedicated 
Government and Defence Systems.
(1) Telespazio, June 2022: Thales Alenia Space and Telespazio sign follow-on contract with Italian Ministry of Defence to develop the SICRAL 3 SATCOM system
(2) SpaceRef, July 2023: Hisdesat will launch the first satellite of the SPAINSAT NG programme next summer
(3) Thales, July 20119: Thales Alenia Space and Telespazio win contract from Italian Space Agency
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 68
SECURE SATCOM GOVERNMENTAL SUPPLY SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY
Governmental supply from Cat II countries (2025–2040)
XXXX
Situation up to 2025
National government satellite capacity supplied from Category II countries will include two 
networks in the 2020–2025 time period:
• The U.K. Skynet-5 GEO satellite network. Those assets, procured through a PFI (Private 
Finance Initiative) programme, is estimated to be nearing their end of life. They offer both 
UHF and X-band capacity.
• New Highly Elliptical Orbit (HEO) satellites procured in Norway. (HEO satellites provide 
a better and permanent coverage in Northern latitudes, cf. pages 79).
The U.K. government ordered in the interim communication GEO satellite Skynet-6A in 
2020 with a launch planned for the year 2025(1). This new satellite will likely replace existing 
capacity and potentially include additional supply in the Ka-band. 
From 2024(2), capacity supply in X-band is estimated to increase following the launch of the 
ASBM 1 and 2 satellites (Arctic Satellite Broadband Mission). ASBM satellites are procured 
by Space Norway HEOSAT AS, a subsidiary company of Space Norway(3). The two satellites 
include X-band payload for the Norwegian MoD (Ministry of Defence) that will provide polar 
coverage from 65° North as well as an interoperability with the U.S. WGS constellation.
XXXX
Evolution over the 2025–2040 period
No satellite is yet formally planned for the 2025–2040 period, though the U.K. government 
is expected to increase its satellite communication capacity beyond the interim Skynet-6A 
satellite. Norway’s ASBM 1 and 2 satellites are assessed to reach their theoretical EOL in 
2039, while Skynet-6A is expected to do so in 2040. 
We anticipate that new government programmes will be procured in Category II countries 
between 2030 and 2040. The need to continuously support military operations, and the 
increasing activity in Northern latitudes, is estimated to result in decisions to maintain and 
expand capabilities. 
In line with the assumptions that were applied for the government of the Category I 
countries, it was assumed:
• The launch of at least one additional GEO system of approximately less than 5 Gbps in 
the second part of the decade.
• The potential replacement and expansion of the HEO capacity in the second part of the 
next decade. 
The forecast for secure SATCOM for 2040 is influenced by the introduction of optical 
payloads which will be reserved for specific applications alongside broadband capacity as 
well.
KEY UNDERLYING ASSUMPTIONS
• U.K. is likely expected to pursue the Skynet programme, through GEO 
“proprietary”capacity, and potentially through the addition of capacity from third 
party networks.
• Strategic interest for the Polar regions would increase, likely leading Norway to add 
more capacity between 2035 and 2040 for mobile broadband applications, covering 
both civilian and military needs in the area.
(1) Airbus, July 2022: SKYNET 6A satellite passes Critical Design Review 
(2) Space SYSTEMS Command, July 2023: Space Systems Command and Space Norway Complete Enhanced Polar System Recapitalization Flight One Payload Thermal Vacuum Test
(3) SpaceNews, July 2019: Northrop Grumman to build two triple-payload satellites for Space Norway, SpaceX to launch
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 69
SECURE SATCOM GOVERNMENTAL SUPPLY SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY
Macro trends impacting the GEO commercial supply
XXXX
Uncertain dynamics from the middle to long-term regarding 
the addition of commercial GEO capacity over the European 
Union
Assessing the long-term supply dynamics for commercial satellite capacity from GEO 
systems presents several challenges. Among these:
• Competition from NGSO systems will be strong and get more competitive over time, 
especially in all the segments where low latency is considered as a strong added value, 
and if/when the user terminals are competitive in terms of performance and price. The 
IRIS2 initiative for a  satellite constellation would also address European needs(1). This 
will be beneficial and support with addressing part of the market gap for GEO satellite 
platforms. It is worth noting that several European operators have already invested in 
NGSO capabilities, including SES and more recently Eutelsat with its combination of 
activities with OneWeb. 
• In Europe, considering the open commercial market, capacity from non-European 
operators, in particular from Viasat in the Ka-band, is estimated to increase significantly 
with the forecast launch of Viasat-3 EMEA (Europe, Middle East and Africa)(2)(3). This may 
make the decision to invest in new GEO broadband systems for the European market 
more challenging in the next few years. 
It is noteworthy to mention that the decision to invest in the Konnect VHTS satellite (ordered 
in 2018) came together with the announcement of significant presales to the Orange and 
Thales group(4). It is likely that a new decision to invest could depend on the reach of a high 
level of use of the Konnect VHTS system, and on the willingness of a set of clients in large 
European countries to commit to new GEO capacity. 
In the near term and at a global level, commercial operators are increasingly opting for flexible 
GEO satellite systems with medium to large size payloads. The balance between decisions to 
invest in GEO vs. NGSO capacity in the middle term presents a large level of uncertainty. Our 
scenario in the frame of this report, assumes the launch of a mid-sized satellite before the end 
of this decade, and a limited increase over the next decade.constellation.
XXXX
GEO capacity supply: potential dynamics over the EU
Regarding the different timelines (up to 2040), the potential dynamics are the following: 
Near term (before 2025)
• Large GEO HTS capacity addition. As an example from Eutelsat (Konnect VHTS, launched 
in 2022) and Viasat satellite operators.
• Several operators invest in flexible GEO systems, with some supply possibly over the 
EU(5).
• Entry into service of several commercial NGSO broadband constellations(6)(7).
Middle term to 2030
• Potential slowdown in capacity additions, including from operators in Category I. Possible 
to have one mid-sized system with targeted coverage. 
• Expected deployment of an EU procured NGSO constellation (IRIS2).
Long-term to 2040
• Limited visibility, with dependence on the balance in the use of NGSO and GEO platforms, 
and on the integration with terrestrial networks. 
(1) European Union, March 2023. Factsheet: “Iris²: Infrastructure for Resilience, Interconnectivity and Security by Satellite”, March. 
(2) Capacity of each Viasat-3 satellite is 1Tbps, The Viasat-3 satellite constellation
(3) The two first Viasat-3 satellites are planned to be launched before 2024: Viasat Q3FY23 sgareholder letter
(4) Orange and Thales secured as distribution partners,Thales, March 2018: Eutelsat commande Konnect VHTS, 
(5) Astra 1Q is expected to provide capacity over Europe from 2024, SES H1 2023 results, the 03rd of August 2023, available here: SES 
financial results
(6) OneWeb plans global coverage for Q3 2023, Eutelsat, August 2023: Eutelsat Investor Presentation
(7) O3b mPOWER to enter into service in Q3 2023, SES H1 2023 results, the 03rd of August 2023, available here: SES financial results
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 70
SECURE SATCOM COMMERCIAL SUPPLY SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY
Commercial GEO supply from Cat I countries (2025–2040)
XXXX
Situation up to 2025
Approximately 30 GEO satellites owned by operators from Category I cover partially or 
entirely the EU territory. Among them, the vast majority currently carry regular payloads with 
widebeam coverage. The vast majority of that capacity is used to support video distribution 
services, while part of them also support data services for different applications, such as 
inflight connectivity.
In comparison, four satellites had HTS payloads onboard in the second part of 2021, with 
one from Hispasat 30W-6, Hellas Sat-4, the new Konnect and Quantum satellites of Eutelsat. 
Following a period of relative stability, the supply capacity dramatically increased with the 
launch of the Konnect VHTS satellite of Eutelsat in September 2022. Konnect VHTS is a GEO 
satellite, offering capacity in the Ka-band to end-users (with Q/V band for gateway links).
The satellite operators SES and Hispasat are estimated to be able to offer together more 
than 10 Gbps of capacity over Europe via GEO systems. It is noteworthy that SES also 
operates the MEO constellation O3b, with the deployment of the new generation mPOWER 
which started in December 2022.
Currently using Intelsat capacity, the Ovzon company plans to launch its first satellite 
(Ovzon-3) in late 2023 or early 2024(1).
XXXX
Evolution over the 2025–2040 period
In the near term, we do not anticipate the procurement of large GEO HTS systems by 
operators in the Category I, in view of the capacity already being planned. It is noteworthy 
that the capacity increase is primarily related to the Konnect VHTS satellite. We still anticipate 
that at least one GEO satellite platform (typically flexible) could be procured to address a set 
of requirements (from mobility to broadband) in the second part of this decade. 
While more capacity could be available, situations could exist where the entire capacity over 
a certain territory would have been leased by one to several clients. This could for example 
be the case for the capacity of Konnect VHTS in certain countries in the EU. 
For the 203–2040 time period, the current scenario assumes that:
• The requirement of certain users, and/or the ability to combine the use of GEO and NGSO 
supply efficiently results in a continuous use of the two orbits.
• Large operators currently in the Category I remain in that category (under the definitions 
that would be considered as relevant in 2030 and after).
• Consequently, capacity is being replaced, and partially extended, however at a slower 
pace than the potential growth of satellite traffic (thus corresponding to a relatively lower 
share in the supply and use of GEO platforms). 
KEY UNDERLYING ASSUMPTIONS
• One or a few commercial satellite operators from Category I would provide new GEO 
HTS satellites to ensure growing needs for broadband and mobile applications but 
with balance and relevant investments between GEO and NGSO assets.
• Broadcast satellites reaching EOL before 2030 would be replaced with new types of 
assets fitting the SATCOM market shift from broadcast video to data.
(1) Ovzon, June 2023 : Ovzon provides update on launch and progress of the Ovzon 3 satellite
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 71
SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY
Macro trends impacting the NGSO commercial supply
XXXX
Future Cat I commercial NGSO supply dependent on multiple 
factors
It is noteworthy that a single European Union operator currently fully owns a NGSO (MEO) 
constellation that is estimated to cover at least part of Europe. Several considerations shall 
be taken into account with regards to future prospects:
• The operator Eutelsat has combined its activities with OneWeb. This is likely to represent 
its focus in NGSO broadband assets in at least the near term. The operator SES, in addition 
to its MEO constellation, may consider investments in the LEO orbit, as suggested in an 
interview with SES’s CEO in January 2022(1). The size and profile of such an investment is 
unknown. No plan has been announced by other satellite operators in Category I.
• In addition to the most prominent NGSO satellite programmes, it is noteworthy that 
several dozens of companies have submitted filings for spectrum in the NGSO orbit, 
including the last quarter of 2021. Those organisations, for the ones identified, were not 
in Category I.
• For most commercial operators, an NGSO broadband constellation is a global 
infrastructure, with the ability to generate a return being dependent on the ability to 
generate large revenues from a large number of national markets. Europe would only 
represent a share of the addressable market to that target. 
• The IRIS2 initiative for a  constellation for secured communication shall also have 
an impact on the perceived addressable market in Europe, and on the strategy for 
investments in NGSO assets by commercial operators, although the impact may highly 
depend on the design of that programme. 
Understanding that NGSO constellations of the next decade would involve completely 
new generations of assets, any forecast can only be conservative. It could involve both 
new technology designs, as well as potential changes in the corporate ownership of the 
programmes. 
XXXX
Commercial NGSO capacity supply: potential dynamics over 
the EU
Regarding the different timelines (up to 2040), the potential dynamics are the following: 
Near term (before 2025)
• Capacity from the upcoming O3b mPOWER constellation will become available over part 
of Europe (commercial service to start by the of end of 2023)(2).
Middle term to 2030
• Potential extension of the NGSO assets of SES(3). 
• Expected deployment of IRIS2 programme providing additional NGSO supply and 
impacting the strategy for and/or availability of commercial NGSO supply.
• Probability of a  deployment of another new commercial broadband constellation of 
Category I considered as having a low probability.
Long-term to 2040
• It is estimated that at least one constellation from category I will have coverage over 
Europe. 
(1) Via Satellite, January 2022: SES Will ‘Likely’ Leverage LEO in Multi-Orbit Future, by Mark Holmes, 20 January 2022
(2) SES H1 2023 results, the 03rd of August 2023, available here: SES financial results
(3) Projet de loi autorisant le Gouvernment, à financer le programme “Medium Earth Orbit Global Services (MGS) Luxembourg”, 21st of 
February 2023
SECURE SATCOM GOVERNMENTAL SUPPLY 
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 72
SECURE SATCOM COMMERCIAL SUPPLY SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY
Commercial NGSO supply from Cat I countries (2025–2040)
XXXX
SES’ O3b mPOWER : currently the only NGSO constellation 
in Cat I (5)
SES currently operates the MEO O3b constellation of 20 satellites in the Ka-band. O3b’s 
current coverage of Europe is very limited. However, SES started launching in 2022 its 
new generation “O3b mPOWER” constellation. With an announced coverage going up to 
52°N(1), the constellation is estimated to cover up to the North of France, i.e. covering part 
of central to southern Europe. 
SES has reportedly been working on proposing a more integrated network capability, with 
the possibility to combine use of its MEO and GEO assets(2). The O3b mPOWER constellation 
is also operating in the Ka-band. The initial deployment is estimated to include 11 satellites, 
of which 4 were launched as of May 2023 and the remaining are planned to be launched in 
2023 and 2024. O3b mPOWER satellites are estimated to have flexibility features, thanks 
to dynamic beam-forming, steering and sizing(3). 
XXXX
Evolution over the 2025–2040 period
Following the planned launch of the 11 O3b mPOWER spacecraft, SES has expansion 
plans for its NGSO system. In May 2020, SES asked the FCC (Federal Communications 
Commission) to grant U.S. market access for a constellation of 36 LEO satellites that would 
provide high data rate communications for internet-of-things devices and serve as a relay 
network for other digital traffic. SES also asked for market access rights for an additional 
34 satellites that it would add to the O3b broadband constellation it has already deployed in 
MEO. SES told the FCC the purpose of its new MEO filing is to prepare for a third generation 
of O3b satellites, which would follow the first eleven O3b mPOWER satellites. For its thirdgeneration O3b network, SES said it wants to operate 10 satellites in an equatorial MEO 
orbit. Another 24 satellites would operate in inclined MEO orbits and would use a smaller 
platform that allows for more satellites to fit within available launchers(4).
It is estimated that at least one NGSO constellation could be operated by an operator included 
in Category I, and that capacity would be increased, either by adding more satellites and/or 
KEY UNDERLYING ASSUMPTIONS by using new technical capabilities (such as the use of higher frequencies etc.). 
• O3b mPOWER constellation would expand in the 2020’s decade in relationship with 
the SES request to the FCC (MEO/LEO) on May 2020. The coverage of Europe may 
only be partial for most, if not all, of the current decade. 
• There is no assumption of another NGSO constellation in Category I countries until at 
least 2030; this is excluding a potential commercial service from the EU constellation 
initiative.
• At least one constellation would be available from a category I country in NGSO, with 
capacity increase over the period.
• High level of uncertainty applies in view of the limited number of constellations. 
(1) Projet de loi autorisant le Gouvernment, à financer le programme “Medium Earth Orbit Global Services (MGS) Luxembourg”, 21st of February 2023
(2) SES, MEO and GEO, our multi-orbit strategy
(3) SES H1 2023 results, the 03rd of August 2023, available here: SES financial results
(4) SpaceNews, 29th of May 2020, SES details LEO constellation and expanded MEO constellation to FCC
(5) To be noted that OneWeb has become part of the Eutelsat group during the report production, thus complementing the NGSO supply within Category I countries
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 73
SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY
Commercial GEO supply from Cat II countries (2025–2040)
XXXX
Situation up to 2025 
Most of the GEO satellite capacity supplied by satellite commercial operators belonging to 
Category II currently belongs to Inmarsat(1), the U.K.-based satellite operator. In particular, 
most of the capacity is associated with the Inmarsat-5 F5 that got launched in 2019 and 
covers a  corridor from Europe to the Middle East. In addition to its current fleet of HTS 
satellites (Inmarsat-5/GX family), at least one satellite from a new generation of satellites 
currently under procurement is estimated to cover the EU territories(2). All of the capacity is 
currently in the Ka-band. 
A major consideration is however the closed acquisition of Inmarsat by the Viasat company. 
Whether Inmarsat remains an operator standing in Category II may depend on the operation 
process after the acquisition. We have currently maintained Inmarsat capacity in Category 
II for the purpose of the report.
Avanti, with its Hylas-4 satellite, would be the second provider of capacity supply (also in 
Ka-band). Additionally, several Gbps of capacity supply in Ku-band is forecast to be provided 
over Europe by Telesat and Telenor (via the satellites Thor 7 and Thor 10-02). Telenor is also 
a supplier of HTS Ka-band capacity. This HTS capacity would however be primarily over 
maritime areas and/or focused on the Middle East and North African areas.
XXXX
Evolution over the 2025–2040 period
It is estimated that capacity could increase in the second part of the decade. However, 
this would be dependent on decisions by a limited number of operators. While we could 
anticipate new investments by Inmarsat in order to increase the capacity of its fleet 
for mobility services, the closed transaction with Viasat could result in a  large revisit of 
investment priority, and a change of technology platforms (and potentially of qualification 
between Category II and other Categories). 
KEY UNDERLYING ASSUMPTIONS
• Impact of growing trends for mobility. Today, mobility currently consists of In-Flight 
and Maritime Connectivity markets as they are the most relevant. Over the period, 
interest in mobility may shift toward connected cars with the rise of IoT, connected 
devices and the overall digitalization of transportation.
• Renewal of spacecrafts to maintain Ka-band landing rights in the U.K. 
• Potential impact of future Inmarsat depending on the closed transaction with Viasat.
(1) Viasat (U.S.) finalized the acquisition Inmarsat (U.K.) the 31st of May 2023
(2) Inmarsat orders GX7,8&9, Inmarsat, May 2019: Inmarsat partners with Airbus 
SECURE SATCOM GOVERNMENTAL SUPPLY 
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 74
SECURE SATCOM COMMERCIAL SUPPLY SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY
XXXX
Situation up to 2025
The two companies having NGSO constellations under development in Cat II countries are 
OneWeb(6) and Telesat.
Following launch of all the Gen 1 satellites, OneWeb is forecast to offer full global coverage 
(including Polar regions) with more than 600 satellites and very low latency (< 50 ms) via 
LEO in Q3 2023(1). OneWeb exclusively uses Ku-band.
Space Norway Heosat AS, due to the Ka-band commercial payloads embedded on the 
ASBM 1 & 2 satellites, will be able to offer a few Gbps of capacity supply from 2023 to 2025. 
Nonetheless, this capacity supply will not be offered to end-users directly by Space Norway 
Heosat AS. Indeed, those 2 Ka-band commercial payloads have been leased to Inmarsat 
and named Inmarsat GX-10A & GX-10B according to Inmarsat satellites fleet. Operating in 
HEO (Highly Elliptical Orbit), Inmarsat GX-10A and GX-10B payloads will ensure continuous 
coverage of Artic area (above 65°N) and are dedicated to mobile markets(2).
• In August 2023, Telesat announced that its Lightspeed project is fully funded and 
selected MDA a prime contractor for building the 198 satellites for the constellation. 
Satellites have been announced to include digital beamforming array antennas and 
integrated regenerative processor. Satellite launches are scheduled to commence in 
mid- 2026 and global services to begin in late 2027(3). 
XXXX
Evolution over the 2025–2040 period
For OneWeb, some evolutions plans have been identified. It is estimated that such an 
evolution would be more focused on flexibility than on additional capacity. Indeed, in 
October 2022, OneWeb and Eutelsat (in the frame of their planned combination of activity) 
announced they would work together on the conception of OneWeb’s Gen 2 constellation, 
due to enter service by early 2028(4). Such Gen 2 satellites are designed to introduce 
technological evolutions such as beam-hopping. Satellites with beam-hopping abilities will 
be able to remotely direct beams to boost coverage in certains locations, such as areas of 
high-usage where the network is struggling to cope with demand. In May 2023, OneWeb 
launched JoeySat a  demonstration satellite previewing next-generation capabilities, 
planned for Gen 2(5).
Evolution of the programmes at this stage cannot be further evaluated for both OneWeb and 
Telesat, depending on commercial success, renewal strategy and technological evolution.
KEY UNDERLYING ASSUMPTIONS
• High level of uncertainty has been applied with the augmentation of OneWeb and 
Telesat capacity highly dependent on their commercial success in the coming years.
• Replacement of Inmarsat Arctic payloads in the second half of the 2030’s with 
higherperformances satellites relies on growing strategic interests in the Polar region.
(1) Eutelsat, August 2023: Eutelsat Investor Presentation
(2) Inmarsat, 29th of January 2020: a new frontier for governmental users
(3) Telesat, 11th of August 2023: Telesat Contracts MDA as Prime Satellite Manufacturer for its Advanced Telesat Lightspeed LEO 
Constellation
(4) Eutelsat & OneWeb, 12th of October 2022: Eutelsat Strategy update on the proposed combination with OneWeb
(5) OneWeb, 20th of May 203: OneWeb confirms successful deployment of 16 satellites including next generation JoeySat 
(6) To be noted that OneWeb has become part of the Eutelsat group during the report production, thus complementing the NGSO 
supply within Category I countries.
Commercial NGSO supply from Cat II countries (2025–2040)
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 75
SECURE SATCOM MARKET: SUPPLY SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
© Wirestock
SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
DEFINITION OF SPACE-BASED SYSTEM FOR SECURE SATCOM 76
SPACE SEGMENT 77
GROUND SEGMENT 84
USER SEGMENT 87
KEY TECHNOLOGICAL FACTORS ENABLING FUTURE SECURE SATCOM 94
CYBERSECURITY 104
Chapter Summary
Following the exposition of the distinct constituents of the EU Space Programme, as 
well as the examination of secure SATCOM demand and supply, this chapter delves into 
the technical dimensions of secure SATCOM services. It explores how these technical 
aspects influence the performance, reliability, security, and adaptability of satellitebased connectivity. It  helps in comprehending the symbiotic interaction of satellites, 
ground stations, and user terminals, which collaboratively facilitate secure SATCOM 
services. Furthermore, it provides insights into the technological trends and challenges 
inherent to secure SATCOM services across diverse regions and scenarios. The chapter 
covers the following topics:
• explains, within the space segment section, the advantages and disadvantages of 
different orbital regimes while also identifying some technological trends that are 
transforming the space segment.
• explains, within the ground segment section, the need for different communication 
links between the ground segment and the space segment and some technological 
drivers that are influencing the ground segment.
• describes, within the user segment, the building blocks and characteristics of 
different types of user terminals and some user terminal technological trends.
• presents the key technological factors that enable future EU secure SATCOM services. 
It analyses some upcoming radio protocols and some aspects of interoperability 
between satellite gateways and user terminals.
• provides a landscape overview of cybersecurity within secure SATCOM and evaluates 
some aspects of cybersecurity principles and factors that affect the security level of 
space systems as well as the motivations and examples of the key threat actors.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 76
DEFINITION OF SPACE-BASED SYSTEMS FOR SECURE SATCOM SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
Block diagram of space-based system
Building upon the insights already shared, an illustrative overview of satellite telecommunication 
networks was presented on page 24. The intention was to familiarize readers with the 
components (subsequently referred to as actors) integral to the value chain. Additionally, 
a preliminary level of objectives for each segment was outlined. The forthcoming four sections 
within the secure SATCOM technology chapter delve into an in-depth exploration of the 
distinct segments constituting a space-based system for secure SATCOM. it is noteworthy 
that whether concerning SATCOM or secure SATCOM, the block diagram remains consistent. 
While the subsequent sections elaborate on these segments, particular emphasis is placed on 
this page, delving into the security facet of secure SATCOM.
Space segment can be made of one satellite (in GEO, for instance) or several satellites, in the 
case of an NGSO constellation. Irrespective of the orbit (cf. pages 78 & 79 for the different 
possibles orbits), space segment remains vulnerable. It can be hacked, jammed or physically 
damaged. In addition to specific features against jamming and spoofing, a  relevant way 
to increase the resilience of the space segment is to rely on NGSO constellation; indeed, 
even with a  reduced number of satellites, an NGSO constellation can provide a  service 
in a degraded mode. a step further to NGSO constellation is the multi-orbit space-based 
system. In addition to the complementarity between the different orbits (cf. pages 78 & 79 
which present the advantages/drawbacks of each orbit), a  multi-orbit system is resilient 
by nature. Multi-orbit space-based system includes the combination & interoperability 
between different systems (from different countries and/or from governmental/commercial 
entities). Pages 80 to 83 illustrate how the technological evolution of the space segment 
impact SATCOM in general and specially, the provision of secure SATCOM.
Ground segment is the unique interface to manage the space segment, which generally 
constitutes from the Satellite Control Center (SCC), the Space Operations Center (SOC) 
and the Gateways. From an operational point of view, it allows a  continuous and deep 
monitoring of the satellites (platform and payload) performed 24/7. The TT&C and the M&C 
(Monitoring & Control) as well, need to be secured and protected against any type of threats 
in order to avoid, for instance, malicious commands to be sent to the satellites to damage or 
take the control of it. To increase the protection against vulnerabilities, SCC and MCC can be 
implemented in a redundant mode.
Beyond the security aspect of being resilient against threats and malicious data, the user 
segment encounters its principal characteristics and challenges, primarily addressing 
demands for interoperability and flexible solutions. As highlighted in the chapter about 
demand (from page 20), the missions and operational needs can be slightly different with 
a variety of secure SATCOM end-users.
In addition to the three previously mentioned segments, ensuring the protection of the 
interconnections between these segments is also essential. Consequently, to guarantee 
the confidentiality, integrity and availability of any transmitted information secure SATCOM 
has to incorporate encryption and any other security measures to protect data from 
unauthorized access and interception.
Specificities of space-based systems for secure SATCOM
XXXX
Which specificities for secure SATCOM provision? 
Secure SATCOM has to be provided in a reliable, accessible and guaranteed manner.
Consequently, specific requirements have to be taken into account in the design & operation 
of the space-based system.
Satellite Control 
Center (SCC)
Space Operations 
Center (SOC) Gateway(s)
Space segment
Ground segment
User segment
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 77
SPACE SEGMENT SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
Main characteristics of SATCOM satellite(s)
This page outlines the main characteristics of the space segment and their use for the 
provision of SATCOM services. Such characteristics are applicable to any type of SATCOM 
satellite. Relevant functions to secure SATCOM spacecraft have been highlighted in 
page 76.
A communication satellite is an artificial satellite that relays and amplifies radio 
telecommunication signals via a transponder; it creates a communication channel between 
a  source transmitter and a  receiver at different locations on Earth. Communications 
satellites are used for television, telephone, data, radio, and internet, in civil and military 
applications.
A communication satellite includes the satellite payload and the satellite platform, also 
known as the satellite bus.
The satellite platform provides all the necessary services to the payload:
• Structure to support all satellite units and mitigate mechanical stress.
• Thermal regulation system, often passive using Optical Solar Reflector (OSR), MultiLayer Insulators (MLI), radiators and heat pipes. The thermal system is dedicated to 
temperature maintenance and dissipation capability.
• Electrical Power generation & Storage System (solar panels, batteries, power regulation 
and distribution) used to power all the satellite systems.
• Attitude & Orbit Determination & Control System (AOCS) used to keep the satellite in the 
right orbit, with its antennas pointing in the right direction and its power system pointed 
towards the sun. Sub-systems are used for the determination of the position (Inertial 
Measurement unit, on-board computer, star trackers, Earth sensors, GNSS receivers) and 
its control (Thrusters, Reaction wheels, magneto torquers).
• Propulsion system (predominately used to reach the operational orbit when injected by 
the launcher on a less energetic orbit).
• Telecommand and Telemetry system (using radio communications) to be operated from 
the ground. As low data rate is enough UHF-, VHF- or S-band are generally used.
The communication payload of the satellite is ensuring the SATCOM mission. It includes 
RF equipment (such as amplifiers, converters, multiplexers, and modems) and transmitting/ 
receiving antennas. The communication payload acts as a repeater and basically 
consists of antennas and one or more transponders, operating in parallel, with separated 
amplification chains, on different channels in sub-bands of the total available bandwidth. 
The communication repeater can be transparent, often referred as a ‘bent-pipe’ repeater in 
the literature, or be an onboard processing repeater.
When the received signal is in reception mode, the transparent repeater undertakes channel 
separation and amplification. Subsequently, the aggregated channels are transmitted 
through the antenna in transmission mode. In the case of an onboard processing repeater, 
the baseband signals (modulated on the uplink carrier and received and amplified by the 
satellite), are demodulated on board and then modulated on the downlink carrier to be 
transmitted to ground.
© Thales Alenia Space
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 78
SPACE SEGMENT SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
XXXX
GEO (GEOSTATIONARY EARTH ORBIT)
Spacecraft situated in GEO, located at an altitude of 35,786 Km, have their orbits synchronised with the rotation of the Earth. Consequently, they stay in the same position in the sky with 
respect to a given point on the Earth’s surface, meaning that an antenna does not need to move to track the satellite. a main feature of GEO’s satellites is that they have a large view of 
the Earth, approximately one-third (excluding the Polar Regions), meaning that three spacecraft can offer quasi-global connectivity. When considering the Polar Regions, Geostationary 
orbits have a very low elevation angle, thus GEO satellite performance quickly decreases at the poles. The highest Northern and Southern latitudes at which GEO satellites are still generally 
considered efficient are approximately 75 degrees, meanwhile, beyond 81 degrees they are below the horizon. Given the altitude of the satellite, total delay experienced by the users would 
vary between 478 and 556 milliseconds (depending on where on the Earth’s surface the user/Earth station is located). The received power on the ground is directly impacted by the orbit, the 
transmitted power by the satellite and the frequency-band used. This received power on ground dictates the required antenna gain, hence influencing some characteristics of the usable antenna 
types. Regarding other orbits such as MEO or LEO (closer to Earth than GEO), the received power on the ground would be less attenuated (as distance is lower). 
XXXX
MEO (MEDIUM EARTH ORBIT)
The MEO is a range of orbits that extends from 1,000 Km to 35,786 Km altitude. Most satellites currently operated in MEO orbits are at an altitude of about 8,000 km but many are also at 
higher altitudes. For satellites operated at 8,000 Km altitude, the total delay experienced by the users is approximately 200 milliseconds (this does not account for processing time that may 
occur in the satellite or on the terrestrial network). The satellites that operate in this orbit move across the sky with respect to a given point on the Earth’s surface, meaning that an antenna 
needs to track the satellite. Omni-directional antennas cannot be employed due to the required antenna gain, as such antennas need to be directed towards the satellite’s transmission. 
When one satellite moves out of the visible arc of the antenna, the antenna will need to re-connect to the following satellite. This will mean an interruption to connectivity and of the service 
unless two antennas are engaged to allow for at least one to maintain connectivity whilst the other is repointing towards another satellite (Soft/Hard handover principles). a solution is the 
use of phased array antennas with beam steering on board the satellite to keep a fixed target on Earth: in this way, the complexity is transferred onto the space segment keeping the user 
equipment simple and less expensive. The coverage areas of MEO satellites operated at 8,000 km altitude in an equatorial plane are limited in latitude to 50° North and South of the 
equator. Given the movement of the satellite compared to the Earth, several dozen satellites are needed to provide global coverage. For example, O3b (owned by SES) achieves such 
global coverage through 20 satellites, and the currently deployed 03b mPOWER will do so initially with 11 satellites.
XXXX
LEO (LOW EARTH ORBIT)
Satellites in LEO orbits operate in altitude ranges from 180 Km to 2,000 Km. Satellites move at a relatively high speed (8.2km/sec) through the sky with respect to a given position 
on the surface of the Earth. The distance between the satellites and the user on/or close to the Earth’s surface means that the total delays are very short compared to GEO altitudes, 
namely in the order of dozens of milliseconds. In addition, the proximity means that there is not the same requirement for high gain, highly directional antennas as there are for orbits at 
higher altitudes. Due to the relatively low altitudes used by LEO satellites, in order to provide continuous coverage to any given point on the surface of the Earth, 1 satellite is not enough 
as in GEO but many satellites are needed. LEO constellations require from a few hundred (<200 for Telesat Lightspeed) to several thousand (Starlink, more than 4,661 satellites are on 
orbit as of August 2023) of satellites to provide a user continuous availability of service from a global perspective. Satellites of all sizes (nano, pico, etc.) can be employed in LEO orbits 
to offer SATCOM services (including secure SATCOM).
Different orbits used for SATCOM satellites: GEO, MEO and LEO(1)
(1) Trends about the deployment of NGSO systems are mentioned on page 80
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 79
SPACE SEGMENT SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
XXXX
HEO (HIGHLY ELLIPTICAL EARTH ORBIT)
Satellites in HEO orbits operate across altitude ranges, as the distance of the satellite will continuously vary along its rotation around the Earth. Indeed, this distance is satellite 
dependent and will vary between its perigee (minimum distance from Earth) to its apogee (maximum distance from Earth). Similarly, satellites in HEO move at a varying relative speed 
through the sky with respect to a given position on the surface of the Earth. Indeed, while the visibility of a typical GEO satellite decreases as latitude increases north or south towards the 
Earth’s poles, HEO satellite constellations can provide efficient communication services for latitudes higher than 67° South or 67° North, depending on the orbital parameters. 
Therefore, they are generally well-suited to provide permanent coverage and high data rate services in polar regions poorly covered by GEO systems as the satellite will remain for 
a long period of time over the region of interest. When using a HEO satellite, good elevation angles may also be observed from regions other than the ones for which the satellite has been 
designed. Remaining in sight from multiple regions can also help to limit the amount of required antenna steering. Typically, for a user in Europe, a two to three-satellites HEO constellation 
can provide continuous coverage. Indeed, several types of configurations (different orbital parameters) can be considered for HEO constellations, and the number of satellites needed for 
coverage might depend on whether a constellation travels on one or more orbital planes. Nevertheless, several satellites are usually required to guarantee continuous coverage in polar 
regions. Molniya orbit is a HEO and was specially used for satellite communication satellites by U.S.S.R. (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) from the 1960s(1).
XXXX
MEO, LEO and HEO are the three different types of NGSO. 
Features of different orbital regimes Primary orbits used for communication networks
Different orbits used for SATCOM satellites: HEO
(1) Observatoire de l’Arctique: Surveillance de l’Arctique
Orbit Distance Operated 
as a constellation
Are multiple orbits possible?
GEO
Long distance from Earth 
(over 35,786 Km). 
➱ High latency
Can be (3 GEOs 
allow global 
coverage up to 75 
degrees)
Only a single possible orbit 
due to spacecraft’s dynamics
MEO
Medium distance from 
Earth (1,000 to 35,786 Km)
➱ Medium latency
Small constellation 
(>8)
Multiple orbits are possible
LEO
Low distance from Earth 
(180 to 2,000 Km)
➱ Low latency
Large constellation 
(>100), increasing 
system complexity
Multiple orbits are possible
HEO Variable distance 
from Earth
Small constellation 
(>2)
Only a single possible orbit
LEO
MEO
GEO
HEO
EARTH
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 80
SPACE SEGMENT SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
Technological trends in SATCOM: HTS & NGSO 
HTS(1) adoption and 
growing data traffic
The ability to reuse frequencies in multiple spot beams is at the heart of the increase in the 
capacity per satellite that can currently be observed. The ability to increase the number of 
spot beams of a smaller size allows the market to move from satellites having a maximum 
of several Gbps of capacity to satellites offering up to dozens or hundreds of Gbps. While 
commercial satellite operators are now investing in their second or third generation of such 
systems, it remains a relatively emerging technology for government-owned satellites.
Such evolution copes with the growing need of capacity for secure SATCOM users 
(cf. chapter secure SATCOM market demand, page 20).
Not exhaustive list of GEO satellites with 
HTS payload from EU satellites operators
• Konnect (Ka-band), launched in 2019.
• Konnect VHTS (Ka-band), launched in 2022.
• Quantum (Ku-band), launched in 2021.
• Eutelsat 10B (Ku-band) launched in 2022.
• Amazonas Nexus (Ku-band), launched in 2023.
• Hellas Sat-4 (Ka-band), launched in 2019.
Deployment of NGSO 
constellation
In the coming ten years, commercial NGSO constellations will account for 70% of the 
satellite demand in number, feeding the growing demand for ground operations. SATCOM 
mega-constellations (Starlink, OneWeb) are expected to unlock new growth opportunities 
for latency-sensitive applications and ubiquitous coverage (including the poles). The 
growing importance of NGSO constellation in connectivity markets is impacting the FSS 
industry, with an increasing number of players implementing multi-orbit strategies (see list 
on the right). GEOs can provide more capacity to a specific region than NGSOs that must 
serve the globe, but NGSOs allow low-latency solutions that can integrate with terrestrial 
infrastructure more effectively than GEOs.
Secure SATCOM users can benefit from low-latency satellite communication services 
worldwide. In addition, a combination of GEO and NGSO can provide cost-effective solutions 
to end users.
Not exhaustive list of Multi-orbit strategies 
of EU satellites operators
• Eutelsat: a  combination of activities with OneWeb is closed 
since 28th September of 2023..
• Intelsat: Global distribution partnership for IFC market in 2022. 
An RFP for 18 satellites MEO constellation is planned to be 
released in the summer 2023.
• SES: Acquisition of MEO operators O3b Networks in 2016/order 
of 11 O3b mPOWER satellites since 2017. O3b mPOWER 
services planned to start in Q3 2023. A combination of activities 
with OneWeb is closed since the 28th of September 2023.
Multiple technological trends, accelerating in the past few years, are shaping the space segment of SATCOM systems. The most relevant trends include the adoption of high throughput 
payloads, the quick deployment of NGSO constellations, the emergence of software-defined satellites, the adoption of higher frequency bands, and the introduction of optical communications. 
These technological trends are being implemented in the EU, the US as well as in Australia, China and Japan. As an example, China is currently deploying its Guowang NGSO mega 
constellation (its ITU filing is for 30,000 satellites) directly to compete with Starlink. As such, these trends are impacting the entire SATCOM landscape, (including secure SATCOM), 
irrespective of geography.
(1) HTS’s (High Throughout Satellites) payload can offer from a few dozen Gbps to several hundreds of Gbps (500 Gbps for Konnect VHTS). a more comprehensive definition of HTS is available in the Annex 2.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 81
SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
Reference status on high-throughput NGSO constellations
The following table, updated as of August 2023, is a non-exhaustive list which focuses only on NGSO high-throughput for FSS systems. Other NGSO constellations exist for MSS such as 
Iridium and Globalstar(1).
SPACE SEGMENT
(1) Iridium is an operational constellation in its second generation (Iridium NEXT). The system provides L-band voice and data through 82 operational satellites. Globalstar is also a fully deployed system in its second generation (with the third generation expected to be launched 
by 2025). The 25 satellites LEO constellation provides lower frequency bands to satellite phones. 
(2) Number of Starlink satellites in orbit as of 27/08/2023; source: Jonathan’s Space Pages Note: some satellites in orbit are not operational, but the precise number is not publicly disclosed. 
(3) Low latency (below 250 ms) is defined on page 33.
SES Telesat SpaceX OneWeb Amazon
Constellation O3b mPOWER Lightspeed Starlink OneWeb Kuiper
Size 11 satellites 198 satellites 1st Gen: 4,408 satellites 1st Gen: 648 satellites Up to 3,236 satellites
Development
4 operational satellites, 4 
slated for launch in 2023, 
and 3 in 2024
Telesat’s contract with MDA 
to build the satellites was 
announced in August 2023, 
aiming to start launches in 
2026.
The 1st generation is operational. 
Over 4,6612) satellites are 
currently in orbit out of 12,000 
planned for 1st and 2nd Gen 
combined.
The 1st generation is fully 
deployed, and full coverage is 
planned to start in January 2024. 
2nd generation satellites planned 
to be launched in 2028.
Deployment has not started; 
the current timeline is to fully  
deploy by July 2026.
Total capacity ~2.7 Tbps 
(200 – 315 Gbps /satellite)
~10 Tbps 
(50 Gbps /satellite)
~88 Tbps 
(~20 Gbps /satellite for 1st Gen)
~5 Tbps 
(~7.5 Gbps /satellite for 1st Gen)
~164 Tbps 
(~50 Gbps /satellite 
estimated)
Frequency band 
(user link) Ka-band Ka-band Ku-band Ku-band Ka-band
Orbit MEO (8,062 Km) LEO (1,000 - 1,350 Km) LEO (550 Km) LEO (1,200 Km) LEO (600 Km)
Satellites mass ~1,700 Kg ~700 Kg ~260 Kg ~150 Kg ~650 Kg
Satellites life >10 years ~10 years ~5 years ~7 years 5 to 7 years
Latency(3) ~150 ms <50 ms <50 ms <50 ms <50 ms
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 82
SPACE SEGMENT SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
Technological trends in SATCOM: flexibility and higher frequency
Introduction of 
software-defined 
satellites
Fully software-defined satellites have emerged as a  major trend in the sector. This is 
particularly true for GEO-HTS satellites which account for the bulk of recent GEO softwaredefined satellite orders. Over the 2021–2022 period, 70% of GEO-HTS satellite orders 
were fully software-defined platforms manufactured by Airbus (OneSat), Thales (Space 
Inspire), and Astranis (Micro-GEO). This adoption is being driven by the key operational 
advantages of software-defined satellites including the flexibility to change parameters 
such as coverage, power, and frequency bands through on-board processing and active 
antennas with beam forming capability. Such advantages will benefit to secure SATCOM 
users which are characterised by a diversity of users (who can be deployed worldwide) and 
who can need an important volume of capacity in an urgent manner (for instance, Forces 
Deployment, Civil Protection, Humanitarian Aid or Institutional Communications use cases).
Software-defined satellites carry other advantages such as manufacturability, wherein 
standardized design-to-manufacture approaches leveraging modular techniques result 
in reduced time to market and lower costs compared to the traditional approach to GEO 
system design/manufacturing. 
Not exhaustive overview of recent software-defined GEO satellite orders
OneSat (Airbus Defence & Space)
• Superbird-9 (JSAT), 2021.
Space Inspire (Thales Alenia Space)
• Astra-1Q (SES), 2021.
• Arabsat-7A (Arabsat), 2022.
• IS-41 (Intelsat), 2022.
• IS-42 (Intelsat), 2022.
• SES-26 (SES), 2022.
Micro-GEO (Astranis)
• Anuvu-1 (Astranis), 2021.
• Anuvu-2 (Astranis), 2021.
• Andesat (Astranis), 2021.
Use of higher 
frequency bands
In recent years, the use of the Ka frequency band by satellite systems has largely contributed 
to the increase in the secure SATCOM capacity being offered (as frequency-band are 
more and more used). Several upcoming commercial systems will use the Q/V-band to 
communicate with their gateways, while the use of the Ka-band will be reserved for endusers in order to further increase the capacity. Ability to offer higher volume of capacity 
clearly fits with the growing need of capacity for secure SATCOM users (cf. chapter secure 
SATCOM market demand, page 20).
On 30th of June 2021, the first-ever satellite with a W-band radio transmitter on board was 
launched by ESA. The objective is to improve the understanding of the atmospheric effects 
in the propagation of radio signals at such a high frequency band(1).
Examples GEO satellites using Q/V-band
• Konnect VHTS spacecraft (launched in 2022) uses Q- and 
V-band for gateway feeder links to optimise the amount of Kaband available to customers.
• Jupiter-3 (launched in 2023) also uses Q/V bands for gateways 
like Konnect VHTS.
(1) ESA: First W-band transmission from space
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 83
SPACE SEGMENT SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
Technological trends in SATCOM: Optical communications
Optical communications
In a world with more and more connectivity needs, the capability to transfer a very large amount of data in real time is becoming crucial for any type 
of organisation, either private or governmental. As the space environment is complex and requires the development of specific and demanding 
products, the cost of terminals for wireless optical communications between satellites remained too high to allow widespread adoption and 
a diversity of applications. However, the rise of NGSO constellations creates the need for inter-satellite links (ISL) to enable increased capabilities 
of the systems. Intra-constellation links can be defined as communications between two or more satellites of the same constellation through 
optical links. ISLs are especially useful for NGSO constellations targeting services all over the world. It also avoids the deployment of a significant 
number of gateways on the ground, saving costs and avoiding facing refusal of landing rights in some geographical areas. Having OISLs (Optical 
ISLs) is very relevant for NGSO constellations as RF link capacity and bandwidth are not always high enough to support many users at the same 
time.
Optical features can be used for communications with third-party satellites, typically for data relay services. Traditional RF communications 
means could be used but optical communications can be very relevant for some use cases as it allows a larger amount of data to be transferred 
with lower latency and thus more real-time data transmission on top of improved security, which is a key criterion for most data relay clients. As 
an example, the public-private European Data Relay System (EDRS), has proven effective in implementing ISL technology, significantly increasing 
the speed of downlink of Copernicus images. The system enables the transmission of data very quickly, avoiding waiting for a satellite to be in 
view of a ground station to transmit the data to the ground.
Direct-To-Earth (DTE) laser communications are defined as communications from a spacecraft located in orbit to the ground. As moving from 
RF frequency to optical use improves the data rate, Optical Ground Stations (OGS) enable obtaining even higher data rates while having smaller 
receiving apertures. However, optical links are also sensitive to the background noise that any ambient light sources cause. Deployment of OGS 
requires the assessment of clear sky availability due to this technology’s sensitivity to weather. Certain regions in the Middle East and Africa, 
Australia, or the United States are therefore privileged. a diversity of stations is necessary for regions such as Europe to maximize the probability 
of communication in these regions.
Secure SATCOM can benefit from Optical communications at two level: First, in the frame of an NGSO constellation (via OISL) and secondly with 
a huge amount and data that can be transferred, including from satellites to the ground. Such disruptive evolution leads to higher perspective than 
the move to higher RF frequency band, as mentioned in the previous page.
Note : The picture on the left shows a European Data Relay System laser communication terminal capable of transmitting 1.8 Gbit/s of data between LEO and GEO. Developed by the DLR German Space Center and TESAT-Spacecom (DE), it is the most advanced of its kind.
© ESA
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 84
GROUND SEGMENT SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
XXXX
The unique interface with the satellite
The ground segment is the part of a satellite communication system that consists of all the 
ground-based elements. The ground segment enables the exchange of data and commands 
between the satellites, the staff in charge of the control/operations of the satellites and 
the end users. The ground segment is a critical component of a satellite communication 
system, as it contributes to the reliability, security, and performance of the space segment 
and the user segment. The ground segment may vary depending on the type and size of 
the satellite mission, the number and location of the ground stations, and the requirements 
and preferences of the operators and users. However, the ground segment includes three 
sub-segments, as described below:
• The Gateway is a ground station that transmits data to/from the satellite to the local 
area network. It houses the antennas and equipment that convert the Radio Frequency 
(RF) signal to an Internet Protocol (IP) signal for terrestrial connectivity. Along with 
key advancements in satellite technology over the past decade, ground equipment has 
similarly evolved, benefiting from higher levels of integration and increasing processing 
power, expanding both capacity and performance boundaries. The system of Gateways 
provides all network services for satellite and the corresponding terrestrial connectivity. 
Each gateways provides a  multiservice access network for subscriber terminal 
connections to the Internet.
• Satellites need a ground-based control system, in order to place them in orbit and then 
to track them during their lifetime. The Satellite Control Centre (SCC) is responsible 
for collecting and sending the telemetry data generated by the satellites and for the 
distribution and the uplink of the control commands that are necessary to maintain the 
satellites and constellation operative. a  Satellite Control Centre (SCC) is responsible 
for a large range of functions but mainly to support satellite(s) management and more 
specifically the monitoring and control (M&C) activities for nominal as well as emergency 
spacecraft operations. Such activities are applicable for the M&C of the satellite platform 
and payload, the mission planning and AOCS (cf. page 77) functions that allow safe 
operations. 
• In addition to that, the Telemetry Tracking and Control (TT&C) and payload data 
communication links are managing the platform and traffic configuration aspects 
respectively. The overall number of Telemetry Tracking and Control (TT&C) stations, 
with its associated RF equipment, modems and baseband equipment, may vary 
depending on the constellation dimension and the orbital location. TT&C stations are 
used to communicate with each satellite on a  scheme combining regular, scheduled 
contacts, long-term test campaigns and contingency contacts. All these components are 
interconnected via a dedicated network.
• Satellite Control Centre is dedicated to control and manage the satellite platform, the 
payload embarked on the platform needs also its driver, whose functionality is demanded 
to the SOC (Space Operations Center). Due to the introduction of complex payloads 
in the core missions, featuring new architectures with multiple spot beam coverage, 
flexible frequency and power resource allocation demand, complex and variable channel 
to beam allocation requirements, digital signal processing(1), adaptative wave-form etc., 
the activities managed within the Mission Control Centre related to the planning and 
resource optimization are becoming more and more complex. Resource optimization is 
performed via the SRM (Satellite Resource Management) which is a major element in the 
frame of the operations of space and ground segment.
The ground segment: a growing key element for space-based infrastructure
(1) Digital Signal Processor is designed to provide flexible channelization and transparent routing capability for advanced space telecommunication applications
Satellite Control 
Center
Space Operations 
Center Gateway(s)
The different links for satellite communication
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 85
GROUND SEGMENT SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
The development of the 5th Generation of communication networks provides a unique opportunity for a seamless integration of satellite with terrestrial networks as an integral component 
of the 5G system. Satellites can offer complementary connectivity options and seamless user experience and provide important benefits when integrated in the overall 5G system, owing 
to its intrinsic advantages including universal coverage, multicasting and broadcasting capability. Satellite ground segment is the key element to reach such objective. 
XXXX
SATCOM & 5G: a bidirectional relationship aiming for an 
integrated connectivity model
There is typically a  5–7 year lag between the start of commercial network deployment 
and the deployment of satellite connected BTS (Base Transceiver Station). a new mobile 
network generation such as 5G will require significant technology improvements to reach 
the required price point to be economically viable. Tests for satellite 5G started in 2020, and 
a 4-year lag for the start of satellite deployment can be anticipated.
Prior to the growth of satellite-based services, each standard usually requires the involvement 
of operators and solutions providers to promote and optimise the usability of the satellite 
solution. Such initiatives are currently undertaken for 5G, largely driven by global satellite 
operators. Nonetheless, it is noteworthy to mention that in 2017, a Joint Statement between 
ESA and the European Space Industry on their concerted efforts on “satellite for 5G” was 
signed. GEO and NGSO players are investing extensively in advanced technology to support 
terrestrial/hybrid 5G solutions as well as promoting and regulating space/Non-Terrestrial 
Network policy to meet all stakeholders’ requirements for upstream/downstream markets. 
5G enables the seamless interworking of different technologies and networks, mobile, fixed, 
wireless, satellite, as well as their orchestration. To reach such objective, satellites will have 
to be transparent, requiring the ground segment to work in line with the orchestration of 
the core network; that’s why 5G requires standardisation of protocols. a satellite operator 
and a  terrestrial service provider sharing 5G protocols are able to propose multiple and 
compatible type of services, relying on standardised procedures.
XXXX
Satellite technological evolutions are in line with 5G 
requirements
The key advantage of 5G networks lies in the ability of the technology to provision more 
capacity from a site, with lower latency and higher quality-of-service than 4G technology 
within the same swath/band of spectrum. 
While growth opportunities are certainly presented by the growth of 5G fixed wireless 
services and 5G mobile network rollouts into rural areas, most 5G deployments require 
levels of population density and throughput per tower that are challenging to address 
with the capabilities/economics of today’s HTS systems. In addition, several relevant and 
important trends are already underway:
• In the space segment (lower cost per bit, flexible payload technologies, low-latency with 
the deployment of NGSO constellation).
• In the ground segment (Q-/V-band gateways, software-defined networking, virtualisation, 
low-cost LEO terminals, etc.).
These trends will significantly improve the ability of satellite solutions to meet the 
requirements of 5G networks (higher capacity/QoS (Quality of Service), lower cost, etc).
XXXX
Which satellites for 6G?(1)
While 5G optimises terrestrial network design to allow the integration of satellite for 
coverage an availability, 6G is expected to optimise network design, implementation and 
operation considering the characteristics of terrestrial and satellite communications to 
create unified networks. Launch of 6G is anticipated around 2030.
Ground segment has a key role to play for satellite and 5G network 
integration
(1) Satellite communications and their role in enabling 6G © GSOA
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 86
GROUND SEGMENT SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
In relationship with the move to higher frequency-band for the space segment (as depicted on pages 82–83), the user segment and the ground segment are logically impacted. The user 
segment has to integrate the technological features for higher frequency-band, but the ground segment is impacted in a slightly different manner. 
XXXX
Crowded spectrum leads to move to Q/V-band
Demand for spectrum has continued to grow at a  rapid pace with satellite and other 
allocated services. SATCOM operators have been required to seek higher frequency-band 
and move to develop commercial operational capabilities in the Q/V-band(1).
The satellite industry is used to sharing spectrum among operators and some fixed 
terrestrial services, but the increasing demand for connectivity has led to greater and more 
frequent tensions. In the Ka-band, there are now growing concerns from satellite operators 
that regulators could repurpose spectrum in the 28 GHz band for 5G. Crowding in the lower 
frequencies has led to a move to higher bands, like Q/V. Use of E-band is also studied by 
Space X, for instance(2).
The ability to provide commercial satellite communications in the Q/V bands meets two 
fundamental needs for today’s GEO and NGSO satellite operators: available bands of 
spectrum and significantly higher rates of data throughput. Depending on the configuration, 
use of Q/V-band can lead to more than twice the available bandwidth available in Ka-band.
Operators using Q/V-band may also look forward to deploying less gateways than if they 
used Ka-band. With more available bandwidth and ability for reuse, operators need fewer 
gateways and fewer diversity sites, which translates into less associated hub equipment. 
It also allows to reduce the number of hardware equipment to be deployed in different 
locations.
Nonetheless, due to the technological evolutions brought by higher frequency bands, the 
different equipment (such as antennas, amplifiers, transmitters ….) are more expensive to 
build.
XXXX
Operating challenges for ground segment
Moving to Q/V-band requires an unobstructed line of sight between transmitter and receiver 
and sufficient power to propagate through the atmosphere. At the Q/V operating frequency, 
attenuation and atmospheric effects are particularly severe, and the effects of rain, clouds 
and atmospheric gas can impair the availability and quality of service.
Some of these issues can be compensated at the gateway by uplink power control (UPC) 
functionality and/or switching to a backup diversity site when disruptions reach a certain 
threshold—which is done today by operators in the Ka and Ku bands. But relevant 
mechanisms and algorithms have to be specially developed and implemented to retain the 
benefits of moving to Q/V-band. 
XXXX
Examples of companies moving to Q/V 
As mentioned previously (cf. page 81) some GEO VHTS satellite with capacity of around 
500 Gbps (Konnect VHTS(3), Jupiter-3) will use Q/V-band for their gateways feeder links. 
However, it is noteworthy to mention that moving to Q/V for GEO VHTS with several 
hundreds of Gbps capacity has to be specifically investigated, with several trade-offs in 
relationship with the operational use cases (cf paragraph about « Operating challenges »). 
For instance, the three Viasat-3 satellites (1st one was launched in May 2023) will stick to 
the use of Ka-band. 
Regarding NGSO constellations, SpaceX holds an authorization for an additional 
constellation of 7,518 very-low-Earth orbit (VLEO) Starlink satellites using V-band 
frequencies. However, SpaceX no longer plans to launch separate V-band satellites and will 
instead seek a modification to add V-band frequencies to a subset of its 2nd Gen Starlink 
satellites. OneWeb has plans to use Q/V-band and is estimated to begin operating Q/V 
payload before November 2023, according to the ITU (International Telecommunication 
Union). Finally, in August 2021, and in the frame of its LEO project (Lightspeed), Telesat 
ordered LEO 3, a prototype satellite that would be able to transmit and receive in Q- and 
V-band spectrum in addition to Ka-band.
Technological driver: use of higher frequency bands
(1) Kratos, August 2022: Crowded Spectrum Pushing Satcom Operators into Q/V Band
(2) Data Center Dynamics, January 2023: Starlink building or expanding more than 20 US ground station sites to operate in E-band 
(3) Konnect VHTS, capacity of 500 Gbps, Thales Alenia Space, September 2022: Lancement réussi du satellite de télécommunnications 
EUTELSAT KONNECT VHTS
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 87
USER SEGMENT SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
XXXX
Building blocks of SATCOM terminals
A user terminal typically consists of several components (see. schema below), including:
• Antenna: This component facilitates the transmission and reception of signals between 
the terminal and satellites. It also includes the Up/Down converters, the amplifiers 
(LNA – Low Noise Amplifier).
• Transceiver: The transceiver adjusts the signal levels of radio frequency (RF) and performs 
frequency conversion between the RF band and a lower frequency band.
• Satellite modem: The satellite modem is responsible for handling the modulation and 
demodulation of information between the terminal's baseband and the network.
• Ancillary subsystem: This subsystem varies in function and composition depending on 
the specific operational needs of the terminal. For instance, it can include encryption/
decryption subsystem, multiplexer/demultiplexer (to mix different frequency bands) and 
interfaces module.
On the following pages, different types of two-way terminals for SATCOM use (also 
applicable for secure SATCOM) are presented. It is noteworthy to mention that Flat Panel 
Antenna (FPA)/Electronically Steered Antenna (ESA) can be used for Land, Aero and 
Maritime environments.
Satellite communication terminals are devices that enable communication services. These 
terminals cater to various operational needs and associated services, leading to the 
identification of different types of user terminals. User terminals can be classified based 
on their operational use, installation, and technical features. These technical features 
encompass:
• Radio electrical performance, including factors such as sensitivity and signal reception 
quality.
• Power consumption and autonomy, indicating the energy requirements and battery life 
of the terminal.
• Availability, referring to the terminal's ability to establish and maintain a connection under 
different conditions, beyond just received power level.
• Dimension and weight, specifying the physical size and mass of the terminal.
• Operational bands, indicating the frequency ranges at which the terminal can operate.
• Resilience against interference, highlighting the terminal's capability to withstand and 
mitigate the effects of external interference sources.
• Cost, representing the economic considerations associated with the terminal's design 
and production.
Understanding the different types of two-way user terminals is crucial as they are designed 
to meet the diverse requirements of various applications and services. By considering 
factors such as performance, mobility, and the environments in which they operate, 
a comprehensive classification of user terminals can be achieved. This classification aids in 
the selection and deployment of appropriate terminals for different use cases and services.
A non-exhaustive list of terminal manufacturers is given on page 25. 
Introduction to the different types of terminals
Ancillary 
subsystem
Satellite 
modem Transceiver Antenna
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 88
USER SEGMENT SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
SATCOM user terminals – Land
Optical communications Land–Fixed terminals are generally dedicated to remote connectivity, information distribution and network redundancy. They require a stable 
placement, and the diameters of the dish-shaped reflector can range from small size (up to 80 cm) to large size (up to 5 m). The dish-shaped 
reflector is mounted on a pedestal without mechanisms for motion.
They are made of: Antenna, Transceiver, satellite modem, Ancillary equipment (as antenna non-penetrating and ballast, set of coaxial cables and 
power supply cable).
Deployables Deployable terminals are of two types: Handheld and Fly-away. 
Handheld terminals are characterised by low weight and dimension so it can be transported by a single person inside a backpack. This terminal 
has been developed for tactical communications in which the operations require the minimum weight and setup time. Handheld terminals mainly 
consist of: Manual pointing antenna, transceiver, and satellite modem.
Fly-away terminals are characterised by antenna size ranging from 0.5 m up to 2.4 m. The terminal is equipped with an auto-pointing system, 
so a low skill is required for operation. The fly-away terminal is made of the same equipment as a manpack.
COTM Communication-On-The-Move (COTM) terminals allow to communicate with an GEO/NGSO constellation when installed on a moving platform 
as they are capable to track the satellites in continuous movement. The related equipment can include a mobile parabolic antenna consisting of 
a dish-shaped reflector on a pedestal with a servomotor to orient the dish. The equipment can include flat panel antennas (FPAs).
Another category of mobile terminals exists, the Communication-On-The-Pause (COTP). Those terminals have been developed for applications 
in which the operations require the vehicle to stop in order to allow the pointing of the antenna. They are generally used to quickly reach 
disadvantaged sites and to allow quick and easy installation; in particular, no systems are required for the operations (such as power supply), 
with the exception of the space to park the vehicle and satellite visibility. COTP terminals mainly consist of: auto-pointing antenna with integrated 
transceiver, satellite model with hybrid capabilities, Wi-Fi access point, and auxiliary equipment.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 89
USER SEGMENT SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
SATCOM user terminals – aero, maritime, 
and flat panel antenna/ electronically steered antennas
Aero Due to the constraints related to an embedded equipment (size, weight, power-consumption), the aero terminals are generally small. Aero 
terminals are installed onboard aircraft, helicopter and UAVs. The aero terminal have an auto-tracking antenna able to point and track the 
satellite during the movements of the platform.
Flat panel antennas (FPA)/Electronically steered antenna (ESA) are very relevant for the aero needs, as their flat shape ensures a small footprint 
and a low drag.
Maritime Maritime terminals include a dish antenna ranging from around 36 cm to 3.5 m (also depending of the size of the vessels) and are able to provide 
satellite communications services between ships and land and intra-ship communication. The possible data rates, in most cases, range from 
300 Kbps to 100 Mbps.
Similar to an aero terminal, the maritime terminal shall integrate an auto-tracking antenna to compensate the movements of the platform and 
stay pointed to the satellites.
Flat panel/electronically 
steered anten
Flat Panel Antennas (FPAs) consist of metallic and dielectric materials and do not need a reflector. a common configuration is to assemble 
multiple patch antennas on an array to increase the antenna’s gain and to obtain a flat shape better suited for mobile applications. Contrary 
to parabolic antennas, the beam pointing orientation can vary electronically. Indeed, the single radiators can be fed with different phase shifts 
and, as a result, the common antenna pattern can be steered electronically. The electronic steering is much more flexible and requires less 
maintenance than the mechanical steering of the antenna.
Flat panel antennas (FPAs) are often portrayed as a game changer when it comes to expanding the role of satellite connectivity in specific 
markets. These antennas are seen as a critical milestone for the adoption of NGSO connectivity. Their flat design is especially suitable to answer 
aero needs, where clients search for a solution with minimum drag (specifically to reduce fuel consumption). Other type of users (such as land 
users) see FPAs as a market enabler if the price point corresponds to their needs. The deployment of FPAs used to track satellites from NGSO 
constellations is estimated to be one of the main drivers in coming years and bringing down the cost or user terminals to meet price points that 
encourage widespread adoption is one of the greatest challenge that NGSO constellation face. They can also open the addressable market to 
smaller platforms (e.g., low SWaP (Size, weight and power) of FPAs can be attractive for smaller aircrafts or UAVs). 
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 90
USER SEGMENT SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
XXXX
Technology Overview
As has been the trend over the past decades within the space industry, SATCOM ground segment equipment will likely continue to integrate commercial telecom technologies (MIMO 
(Multiple-Input Multiple-Output) system, phased arrays, etc.) to increase the efficiency, the market penetration, to reduce the development time and the production cost, etc. There are 
several features and technologies enablers which could contribute to these above-mentioned benefits. The scheme below presents the main user terminal technology trends.
SATCOM user terminal technological trends 
Cheaper User Terminals
This trend is expected to 
occur as mass production 
and higher market 
penetration of user terminals 
drive down costs.
User Terminals with 
Combined Phased-Array 
and Mechanical Steering
The development and 
implementation of user 
terminals with combined 
phased-array antennas 
and mechanical steering 
for beam hopping will be of 
interest.
Virtualized Ground 
Segments
The adoption of virtualised 
ground segments for 
scalability and multioperator switching will be 
adopted as the technology 
matures and the need for 
increased flexibility and 
efficiency arises.
Multi-Beam Technology 
and Beam Clustering
The utilisation of multibeam technology and beam 
clustering techniques to 
optimise coverage and 
resource allocation is 
expected as the technology 
evolves and satellite 
networks become more 
advanced.
Low-Latency SATCOM 
Services
The availability of lowlatency SATCOM services 
using Inter-Satellite Link 
(ISL) systems is expected as 
the technology matures and 
the demand for real-time 
applications and services 
increases.
Enhanced Security Features
As cyber-threats increase, the 
focus on enhancing security 
features will likely be an 
ongoing concern throughout 
the development of future 
GOVSATCOM technology.
Multi-Band, Multi- Operator 
User Terminals
The introduction of user 
terminals with multi-orbit/- 
band capabilities, able to 
work with several operators 
is expected to follow the 
development of combined 
phased-array and mechanical 
steering user terminals.
Non-Terrestrial Network 5G
The implementation of NonTerrestrial Network 5G, 
supporting higher frequencies 
and regenerative payload will 
be important for user terminal 
technologies and virtualized 
ground segments.
Variable Quality of Service 
(QoS)
The integration of variable 
QoS capabilities, enabled by 
5G Network slicing technology 
will occur as the technology 
progresses and the need for 
adaptive and tailored SATCOM 
services becomes more 
prominent.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 91
SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
XXXX
Leading satellites operators with multi-orbit strategy
On page 80, a non-exhaustive list of operators with multi-orbit strategy is presented. In line with their multi-orbit strategies, the following satellite operators support the development of 
multi-orbit terminals (list non-exhaustive) :
• Intelsat.
• SES.
• EutelSat/Oneweb.
The next generation of satellite communication encompasses the expansion from GEO satellites to NGSO constellations (MEO and LEO), the increase in orders of magnitude of bandwidth 
(Very High Throughput Satellites — VHTS) and the introduction of low latency orbits. These advancements were developed to enable ubiquitous connectivity for fixed and mobile assets 
across land, sea, and air. The driving force behind the concept of ‘multi-orbit’ is that operators can provide their customers with the ideal characteristics of all orbits in a transparent way. 
From an end-user point of view, multi-orbit is defined as the ability to work concurrently with different orbits and/or move seamlessly from one orbit to another one. 
NGSO constellations offer low latency needed to integrate with terrestrial systems more effectively, while GEO satellites provide more capacity in a  specific geographical area, than 
a constellation does; a constellation is primarily designed to serve the entire globe. Several geostationary (GEO) satellite operators mentioned that they have a strategy for constellations, 
where operators combine GEO satellites with non-geostationary orbit (NGSO) systems to provide SATCOM services aiming at combining the strengths of both. On the other hand, 
multi-service ground segment platforms are built with new, advanced architecture, that enable terminal providers to extend their core capabilities into the next challenges of satellite 
communications. Moreover, SATCOM ground terminal/manufacturers for multi-orbit operations will enable deployment on GEO as well as NGSO constellations including seamless handovers 
between orbits, implementing an uninterrupted and transparent user experience, which operates a single and unified multi-orbit network. 
As the industry shifts towards a multi-orbit model to boost performance and resiliency, some terminal manufacturers are leading the way with a flexible open architecture platform to 
support connectivity from every orbit and every mission (cf. page 92). The demonstrated architecture leveraging the phased-array antenna and open-standards modem has the versatility 
to interoperate with satellites in GEO and non-geostationary (NGSO) orbits, ensuring global connectivity that meets different vertical markets such as government/military, maritime, and 
in-flight connectivity. For instance, the demonstrated high-performance solution leverages phased-array antenna and ultra-fast-roaming capabilities between satellites to support also 
critical manned and unmanned C2/ISR government missions.
In addition to multi-orbit capabilities, the integration of multi-band elements is essential for satellite communication terminals. By incorporating support for multiple frequency bands, these 
terminals can provide enhanced capacity, improved resilience against interference, and the ability to optimise performance based on specific use cases and requirements. This multi-band 
capability enables terminals to cater to a wider range of applications and vertical markets, offering comprehensive and adaptable connectivity solutions.
SATCOM user terminals for multi-orbit & multi-band
USER SEGMENT
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 92
USER SEGMENT SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
XXXX
Examples of manufacturers of multi-orbit terminals
The table below highlights several manufacturers developing new terminals to serve customer’s needs for multi-orbit (including a market positioning in terms of product availability). 
It is important to mention that the list is not exhaustive even if it presents a wide overview of the manufacturers developing new multi-orbit terminals. Nevertheless, some products may be 
in development and/or not publicly announced. 
User terminals for multi-orbit
Terminal 
providers
Samples of products Comments
Intellian
V240MT, Tri-band (C/Ku/Ka). 
XEO Series dual-band 
(Ku/Ka): X100D and X150D.
Terminals installed for mobility use. The XEO Series has seen great traction with 
the X130D and X130D PM across commercial and military markets since they 
were first unveiled in 2022. X150D will be available in Q3 2023.
ThinKom ThinAir (Ku/Ka) for air and 
sea. ThinSat (Ku/Ka) for land.
Most of the demos were conducted for aviation/IFC but, land terminals are also 
capable for multi-orbit, according to ThinKom.
Kymeta Kymeta u8 terminal – 
(LEO/MEO/GEO).
Kymeta was involved in multi-orbit demonstrations (LEO/GEO). Kymeta supports 
Mobility, defence and security markets.
Hughes
HL1100 terminal 
(LEO terminal), prototypes 
available.
Hughes has a major contribution on multi-orbit demos for commercial and military, 
especially as a satellite Modem provider (Model: HM400).
Cobham 
SATCOM
Sea Tel 2400 (2.4m), 
Tri-band – SeaTel 1500 
(1.5m), dual-band.
A demonstration was conducted with SES on MEO/GEO. The terminal supports 
maritime, enterprise, and government/defence.
ALL.SPACE
S2000 series terminal (60cm1m) support 
(LEO/MEO/GEO).
ALL.SPACE, based in U.K., is an emerging technology using optical beamforming 
antennas. Their plan is to launch the commercial product in 2023/2024.
SatixFy Onyx Aero terminal – support 
(LEO/MEO/GEO).
SatixFy, based in U.K./Israel, is also an emerging technology, mainly focused on 
mobility services. Also, plans to support COTM for defence, and moving ground 
vehicles. SatixFy plans to launch the commercial product in 2023.
tah obrysy tahu
tah obrysy tahu
tah obrysy tahu
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 93
SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
XXXX
Benefits of the development of multi-orbit capability
The utilisation of multi-orbit terminals has emerged and has led to transformative opportunities. Notably, this technology facilitates the exploration of new, bandwidth-intensive applications, 
while also delivering significant cost improvements per gigabit. Furthermore, multi-orbit terminals offer the potential to support hybrid connectivity by seamlessly integrating with 
terrestrial networks. This advancement brings about improvement for terminals technology, marked by continuous reductions in production costs and enhanced user-friendliness.
User terminals for multi-orbit (continued)
Selected key criteria for
multi-orbit considerations GEO MEO LEO LEO/GEO MEO/GEO
Geographical coverage(1)
High throughput on a limited 
geographical area
Resilience/Availability(2)
Latency
LEO/GEO opens the way to seamless global coverage (while MEO/GEO is still missing the polar coverage or high latitude areas to cover)
Multi-orbit systems enhance the space-based systems performances in terms of latency, higher flexibility, usability and cost-efficiency
(1) In LEO, the satellites are closer to Earth and can provide a more precise coverage but need a high number of satellites. In MEO or GEO, the satellites are far away from the Earth and can provide global coverage with a limited number of satellites.
(2) Orbit diversity increases both availability and resilience against any type of threats.
USER SEGMENT
Low
performance
Medium 
performance
High 
performance
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 94
KEY TECHNOLOGICAL FACTORS ENABLING FUTURE SECURE SATCOM SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
Key technological factors enabling future EU secure SATCOM 
Radio protocol to be used in 
SATCOM: 5G, DVB-S2X
The landscape of radio protocols in satellite communication encompasses several key standards and technologies. In commercial SATCOM, two 
primary protocols are widely used: 5G and DVB-S2X. The DVB-S2X standard currently serves as a  prevalent choice for commercial satellite 
communication. However, military organisations either use their own standard for instance MIL-standard in the U.S. or its NATO (North Atlantic 
Treaty Organisation) equivalent, or custom confidential waveforms for other nations. DVB-S2X is mainly used as a current standard in commercial 
SATCOM, however over the long term, it could be anticipated that the upcoming non-terrestrial 5G (which will be updated soon) is estimated to pave 
the way and become another important standard. Indeed, it will benefit from the 5G terrestrial eco-system. 
Interoperability between satellite 
gateways and user terminals 
enabling roaming and full mobility 
and dynamic tracking 
Generally, the terminals discussed in the above sections do not currently support newest industry trends appearing in terrestrial 5G such as roaming 
and network slicing. Non-terrestrial 5G terminals is a relatively new concept which is estimated to still evolve in the coming years. This evolution 
is likely to prompt SATCOM terminal manufacturers to transition from DVB-S2X to 5G, driven by the advantages offered by non-terrestrial 5G's 
integration with the terrestrial 5G ecosystem. Although there are differences in the air interfaces, the efficiency disparity from a radio efficiency 
standpoint is relatively small. The key benefit of non-terrestrial 5G lies in its ability to facilitate seamless integration between non-terrestrial 5G 
SATCOM terminals and the terrestrial 5G infrastructure. Terrestrial 5G modem chipsets will have to be modified to accommodate SATCOM links. 
Nevertheless, it is expected that the integration of non-terrestrial 5G will enable some cost saving, ease of roaming capabilities for mobile terminals 
among different geographical regions, and easier handover from terrestrial network to SATCOM network (some mobile terminals already offer this 
feature, but the engineering is rather complex as the air interface is not the same, e.g.: 4G to DVB-S2X etc.).
High-level assessment of 
virtualisation techniques
With the emergence of the technologies such as virtualisation/cloud but also artificial intelligence, the concept of process flow (i.e. computer traffic in 
general or more specifically SATCOM traffic in this report) and its lifecycle are changing. Historically, the process flow was defined as a sequence of 
tasks, statically encoded in a flowchart during the design phase, and then deployed in a run phase. Now, with virtualisation and artificial intelligence 
technologies, the process flow can be dynamically updated according to its context and environment. This technique can also be used in telecom 
system orchestration and traffic monitoring, etc. In fact, ground segment providers are working actively to integrate those techniques to ground 
segment system in order to reduce infrastructure costs and improve performance and scalability, etc. The increased SATCOM capacity in GEO and 
NGSO systems in the coming decades will imply that the ground segment will have to be scaled accordingly. NGSO constellations (and perhaps 
to certain extent GEO constellations offering global coverage) will require more interconnected infrastructure with several dozens of gateways 
connected to Point-of-presences, and backbone infrastructure. Moreover, customer services will become more and more sophisticated with various 
QoS (Quality of Service) prioritisation rules, and various coverages needs, beam handover to extend coverage in GEO and NGSO systems.
The key technological factors, enabling future EU secure SATCOM, are briefly presented on this and following pages, and in more detail on the following pages. They are impacting, at 
different levels, the segments of the secure SATCOM system.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 95
KEY TECHNOLOGICAL FACTORS ENABLING FUTURE SECURE SATCOM SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
Key technological factors enabling future EU secure SATCOM (continued)
Prioritisation rules 
Prioritisation rules has been defined by different telecom standards. For instance, 3GPP (3rd Generation Partnership Project) 5G group defined 
prioritisation rules. The core network makes it possible to define network slices as dedicated or shared. The ability to change the QoS (latency, 
throughput) of different communication traffic in limited bandwidth communication channels is called network slicing. The concept can be very 
useful for prioritise more critical traffic (emergency calls, etc.). 
Network slicing could be a very useful technology for future secure SATCOM services. Indeed, for example, it is estimated to provide the ability to 
prioritise an “emergency crisis telecom link” versus a “non–urgent traffic” use case. Network slicing is one core feature of 5G. 
Cyber-threat capability trends 
versus security techniques in endto-end secure SATCOM links
The cyber-threat is expanding and is targeting more and more of the space industry with cybercriminal activities becoming increasingly professional. 
Running a risk analysis allows to define an exhaustive list of informational assets, to understand the threat landscape, the potential vulnerabilities 
and risks, their likelihood of occurrence, the potential impact, and how to find risk mitigation techniques. In particular, the process of risk analysis 
should allow to identify various types of supply chain attacks which may be a concern for the secure SATCOM infrastructure. 
The rapid evolution of technology may disrupt space systems which are being currently developed. In particular, quantum technologies may trigger 
not only significant opportunities but also threats to the current type of communications and their associated encryption techniques.
Laser communications, data relay, 
inter-satellite links:
It is not believed that ISL (Inter-Satellite Link) will have a direct impact on user terminals but more on gateways and communication latency. ISL 
technology is maturing, and European players are very active in this sector with at least 3 European suppliers (Mynaric, Tesat ADS, Thales). The 
production cost is going down mainly due to mass production for upcoming NGSO constellations. Each supplier, generally offers several products 
depending on the link distance and characteristics (either LEO -to-LEO or LEO-to-ground or LEO-to-GEO, etc.). The optical ISL generally implies 
the use of and On-Board Processing system (OBP), i.e. to decode packets on-board and direct packets to the right ISL head, etc. Note that Laser 
communication is already used in EDRS (European Data Relay System) as part of Copernicus programme..
Moreover, Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) will be presented and is more and more important to secure link. It is a cutting-edge technology that 
uses the principles of quantum mechanics to securely distribute cryptographic keys between two parties, ensuring secure communication.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 96
KEY TECHNOLOGICAL FACTORS ENABLING FUTURE SECURE SATCOM SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
XXXX
Protocols, key technological factors for SATCOM
There are two main radio protocols used in commercial SATCOM (5G and DVB-S2x). Moreover, anti-jamming and interference avoidance in SATCOM have not been addressed as it is believed to fall inside the military perimeter and is considered as out of scope with respect to this technology report.
Hence, DVB-S2x is the mainly used current standard in commercial SATCOM, however over the long term, it could be anticipated that the upcoming non-terrestrial 5G to be released soon 
is estimated to pave the way and become another important standard because it will benefit from the 5G terrestrial eco-system.
XXXX
5G NTN protocol description and design options
The 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) has been working on the support of nonterrestrial networks with 3GPP defined radio interfaces since 2017 as part of the Release 
15, i.e. adding the capability to support NTN in existing 3GPP technical specifications. a key 
differentiator is whether the satellite provides direct or indirect access to the 5G terminals.
In the indirect case, the handheld is using the 5G terrestrial protocol to communicate with 
a base station. The base station uses equipment like a VSAT terminal and SATCOM link to 
reach the data network. 
In the direct case, the handheld is communicating to the satellite using the 5G radio interface. 
The handheld has in general a low-gain antenna which combined with propagation loss 
from the satellite to the handheld significantly reduces the channel throughput. 
For high throughput applications using 5G NTN, future handheld devices may have to use 
high frequency and high directive antennas (on both ends: satellites and terminals) to use 
direct connections from the handheld to the satellite.
XXXX
DVB-S2x highlights
DVB-S2X is the standard on forward link. On return link, some manufacturers are 
implementing RCS2, others are implementing proprietary waveforms that are very similar to 
RCS2 (MF-TDMA). These will need proprietary modems both in Gateway and user terminal, 
but also and on-board a satellite with regenerative payloads. 
The DVB standard provides efficient support for all applications even if there is some 
weakness on the uplink for some applications like trunking. DVB-S2X offers a good spectral 
efficiency but lower than 5G NR (New Radio) on uplink
Radio protocols to be used in SATCOM
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 97
KEY TECHNOLOGICAL FACTORS ENABLING FUTURE SECURE SATCOM SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
Interoperability can be considered at various levels. Indeed, it can be considered at the level of a SATCOM terminal with various satellite links and various gateways, but in the context of 
secure SATCOM, one should also consider the interoperability of a complete connection between two end-points on the globe. 
One current problem preventing interoperability in the SATCOM industry is that terminals are vendor-specific and tied to gateway technologies. Roaming across different networks is 
generally not possible with the same terminal contrary to terrestrial cellular networks. “Software-defined” terminals allow components of the protocol stack (either control or data plane 
functions) to be replaced on-demand, even during runtime. Migration from hard-wired to reconfigurable logic; already exists in some models e.g. ViaSat CBM-400. If standardisation of space 
radio systems do not converge toward unified radio standards (like it is done in terrestrial system with 3GPP 5G) then one other way to implement interoperability is by accommodating 
arbitrary software from third parties (i.e. different HW and protocol stack vendors). Key driving technologies enabling this interoperability are Software-defined Radio (SDR), Softwaredefined Networking (SDN), Network Functions virtualisation (NFV) as well as fully software-defined terminals (entire L1-L7 stack in software).
XXXX
Interoperability with ground infrastructure(1)
Interoperability should be considered between different infrastructure, i.e. the need for 
connecting institutional ground infrastructure to existing SATCOM capacity. This connectivity 
can be part of the service providers’ packages if the service packages already offer direct 
connectivity to the institution’s HQ, but it could be the case that connectivity with this HQ 
is non-existent. 
Thus, an ad-hoc (or automated which is currently the case in the telecom terrestrial industry) 
connectivity is required to enable the connection between the different communication 
channels. As an example, a connection might be required between the HQ and the enduser or resource (RPAS, etc.) on the field via different means: Firstly, the HQ connects to 
a gateway via a terrestrial line to a satellite; secondly, a connection establish to another 
gateway via an undersea cable and then, hop to another satellite and then reaches the enduser/resource. Depending on the number of requests per day or the urgency of the request, 
the setup and installation of this new communication path may need to be setup rather 
quickly and efficiently. One technology exists in the terrestrial telecom industry and is called 
the MEF standard. Various telecom operators ubiquitously use it to establish communication 
paths and bridges across the world.
XXXX
Interoperability between deployed terminals(1)
Interoperability between the different systems inside a  communication network is an 
important topic. One of the key use-cases behind this is communication across different 
mission needs. 
For instance, some users may want to communicate using SATCOM mobile phones while 
other users may want to communicate using VSAT terminals and still want to talk or 
exchange information with each other. 
At a very high level, there are different means to achieve inter-operability: 
• Either through protocol standardisation e.g., DVB-S2X and 5G (this is what happened in 
the mobile terrestrial industry through the 3GPP group for example). This topic is being 
discussed in a section above called radio protocols.
• Or through more flexible hardware (e.g.: user terminal modem, modem gateway, etc.) 
capable of switching from one protocol to another one on the fly. 
Roaming: interoperability between satellite gateways and user terminals
(1) Numbers are associated to the ones in the scheme presented on page 98.
1 2
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 98
KEY TECHNOLOGICAL FACTORS ENABLING FUTURE SECURE SATCOM SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
XXXX
Challenges of interoperability between terminals and gateways(1)
Interoperability between terminals and gateways would enable the entire stack to be downloaded and dynamically reconfigured, allowing automatic configuration and operational readiness 
within minutes of service setup. a positive development in this direction is the introduction of highly reconfigurable terminals like the ViaSat CBM-400 modem, which can switch among 
a predefined set of waveforms. However, there is still work to be done to achieve true vendor-neutrality and complete interoperability. As an alternative, the adoption of software-defined 
gateways could be considered, enabling their reconfiguration to serve groups of traditional terminals. This option, although more technically complex, would be particularly valuable for 
GOVSATCOM customers with a significant number of installed terminals that are impractical and expensive to replace or upgrade. In such cases, software-defined gateways could be 
employed by Satellite Network Operators (SNOs) to load a protocol stack compatible with the terminals, and associate specific carrier(s) over which the service will operate. In any case, 
key technological enablers towards the increasing use of software for either terminals or gateways are:
• IT virtualisation techniques, allowing complete functional modules to be deployed as Virtual Machines (VMs) or Containers (depending on the depth of virtualisation).
• Software-use trends in the networking industry, built around the fundamental pillars of Software-Defined Networking (SDN) and Network Functions Virtualisation (NFV). 
Moreover, Software-Defined Radio (SDR), is a well-established concept which has become commodity over the past two decades. Several other technologies have been also standardised, 
such as the Common Public Radio Interface (CPRI).
XXXX
Interoperability is a true key technological factor for SATCOM
Interoperability between satellite gateways and user terminals enables roaming and full 
mobility and dynamic tracking. Moreover, most of the existing terminals do not currently 
support the newest industry trends appearing in terrestrial 5G such as roaming, network 
slicing, etc. The non-terrestrial 5G terminal concept is relatively new and is estimated to still 
evolve in the coming years and so will eventually lead some SATCOM terminal manufacturers 
to switch from DVB-S2X to 5G.
From a  radio efficiency point of view, despite the air interface differences, the efficiency 
difference is rather small. The advantage of the non-terrestrial 5G is that it will facilitate 
the integration of non-terrestrial 5G SATCOM terminal with the terrestrial 5G eco-system. 
Terrestrial 5G modem chipsets will require upgrades to accommodate SATCOM links, but 
overall, it is expected that the integration of non-terrestrial 5G will enable some cost savings, 
ease of roaming capabilities for mobile terminals among different geographical regions, 
and easier handover from terrestrial network to SATCOM network (some mobile terminals 
already offer this feature, but the engineering is rather complex as the air interface are not 
the same, e.g.: 4G to DVB-S2X, etc.).
Roaming: interoperability between satellite gateways and user terminals 
(continued)
3
Martime 
terminal Aero terminal
GSO/NGSO satellite GSO/NGSO satellite
User Terminal
Spacecraft Operations
Center
Network Operations
Center
2 2 2 2
3
3
3
1
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 99
KEY TECHNOLOGICAL FACTORS ENABLING FUTURE SECURE SATCOM SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
XXXX
Software-defined terminals/gateways for interoperability
Interoperability could be achieved using software-defined terminals/gateways. These 
concepts need to match the specificities of a SATCOM network, as well as address SATCOMspecific challenges, such as synchronization constraints.  It is believed that the technological 
development steps to bring interoperability using software-defined terminals/gateways to 
maturity could be the following:
1. Development of software-based protocol stacks. This implies the transfer of the 
protocol stack functions currently implemented in bespoke hardware and/or embedded 
software into a  format appropriate to be hosted in a  generic platform (see 2. below), 
using specific APIs (Application Programming Interfaces), library calls and descriptors for 
deployment and management. Licensing, as well as integrity check mechanisms should 
also be in place to protect the software stack from unauthorized duplication, modification 
or reverse engineering.
2. Design, development and prototyping of a reconfigurable generic terminal/gateway 
platform to be able to host virtually any software-based protocol stack, such a terminal/
gateway should normally include i) generic computation and storage of resources to 
accommodate and execute the software and ii) a Software-Defined Radio (SDR) frontend (typically supported by FPGAs (Field Programmable Gate Arrays) for acceleration) 
to process the input/output waveforms. It should also include mechanisms for remote 
automated provisioning and reconfiguration of the protocol stack.
3. Development of a  centralised orchestrator/traffic management platform, on the 
SNO (Satellite Network Operator) side, which should manage the deployment and 
configuration of software stacks, as well as properly steer the traffic across beams/hubs/
satellites in mobility/roaming scenarios.
4. Extensive tests and validation, to assess the interoperability, performance and stability
of the software-driven stack (common issues in software-driven networks in general).
5. Standardisation and harmonisation. The effort towards reconfigurable terminals and/or 
gateways will be successful only if there is major industry adoption. In other words, the 
engagement of a wide community of vendors must be sought. They will have to agree on 
common specifications on HW<>SW APIs, capabilities, drivers, libraries, descriptors etc. 
Ground station antenna for gateway
It is envisaged that this effort will be driven by a critical mass of vendors who will form an 
industry alliance specific for this purpose and produce de-facto standards, which, upon 
global adoption, may be further taken to an international SDO (Standard Developing 
Organisation) for formal standardisation.
Roaming: interoperability between satellite gateways and user terminals 
(continued)
© AdobeStock
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 100
KEY TECHNOLOGICAL FACTORS ENABLING FUTURE SECURE SATCOM SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
Virtualisation techniques in the computing world have been around since the 1960s. However, with the emergence of cloud computing, this technique has become widespread. Cloud 
computing allows for the seamless scaling of computing systems in real-time, dynamically adjusting cloud capacity to meet instantaneous demand.
In essence, virtualisation involves separating the software layer of a computer, server, or network element from its hardware layer. This is achieved by introducing a new layer called Virtual 
Network Slice, which acts as an intermediary. This process can be thought of as creating multiple virtual resources from a single physical resource (computer or server), or vice versa, 
creating one virtual resource from multiple physical resources. Virtualisation extends its reach into various domains, including networking, storage and hardware.
There are two key functionalities that enable virtualisation: Network Function Virtualisation (NFV) and Software Defined Network (SDN). NFV allows different network functions to be 
performed independently on a single hardware, with the added benefit of easy migration between equipment. On the other hand, SDN enables on-the-fly configuration of network elements 
based on the specific needs of different services and applications.
One practical application of virtualisation can be seen in VSAT (Very Small Aperture Terminal). It leverages external network element resources, such as computing resources, to increase 
the flexibility of the VSAT equipment.
Notably, the traditional approach of embedding all Network Functions within gateways has evolved. Virtual Network Functions (VNFs) are now utilised and integrated into centralised 
software controllers, powered by SDN. Additionally, the physical partitioning of infrastructure through network slicing further enhances flexibility and interoperability with terrestrial 
networks.
More generally, IT virtualisation can enhance SATCOM systems in different manners: Resource optimization (virtualisation allows to run multiple virtual instances of software and hardware 
on a single physical server or satellite ground station), flexibility and scalability (the SATCOM system can adapt to changing demands, such as increased traffic during peak times or the 
need to allocate more resources to specific satellite services), cost savings (by consolidating multiple virtual machines (VMs) on a single physical server, hardware and operational costs 
can be reduced), redundancy and high-availability (virtualisation can help achieve redundancy and high availability in SATCOM systems). Isolation and Security (VMs can be isolated from 
each other, providing a layer of security). 
XXXX
IT virtualisation, a key technological factor for SATCOM’s ground segment
Interoperability between terminals and gateways would enable the entire stack to be downloaded and dynamically reconfigured, allowing automatic configuration and operational The 
concept of process flow and its lifecycle are changing with the emergence of the technologies (virtualisation/cloud, artificial intelligence, etc.). Historically, the process flow was defined 
as a sequence of tasks, statically encoded in a flowchart during the design phase and then deployed in a run phase. Now, with artificial intelligence technologies, the process flow can 
be dynamically updated according to its context and environment. This technique can also be used in telecom system orchestration and traffic monitoring, among others. In fact, ground 
segment providers (e.g.: Gilat, Hughes, Newtec, Kratos, etc.) are working actively to integrate those techniques to ground segment systems. It will help to reduce infrastructure costs and 
improve performances, scalability, among others. 
The increased SATCOM capacity in GEO and NGSO systems in the coming decades will imply that the ground segment will have to be scaled accordingly. NGSO constellations (possibly 
also GEO constellations offering global coverage) will require more interconnected infrastructure with several dozen gateways connected to Point-of-presence, and backbone infrastructure. 
Moreover, customer services will become more and more sophisticated with various QoS, and various coverages needs, beam handover to extend coverage in GEO and NGSO systems.
IT virtualisation techniques for ground segment
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 101
KEY TECHNOLOGICAL FACTORS ENABLING FUTURE SECURE SATCOM SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
XXXX
Network slicing and prioritisation rules
Network slicing is the ability to adapt the QoS (Quality of Service) of different users 
sharing the same communication channel. Network slicing could be very useful for 
future secure SATCOM services because it would provide for example the ability to 
prioritise an “emergency crisis telecom link” versus a “non–urgent traffic”. Network 
slicing is one core feature of 5G whereas DVB-S2x is relying on IPv4, IPv6 for the 
Network layer, and thus prioritisation could be possible but in a  much less flexible 
manner. 
In the design phase, the core network allows for the creation of network slices with 
dedicated or shared user-plane, control-plane, or data-plane network functions (NFs). 
When a  device or application requests to connect, subscription and policy controls 
determine the network slice instantiation of NFs to use. a  dedicated User-Plane 
Function (UPF) is needed to provide optimal redundancy level, eliminate the risk of 
interruption from other services and ensure low latency, allowing the user data traffic 
to stay on-premises. 
When the control-plane and data-plane functions are dedicated, the slice constitutes 
a fully independent logical network. The cloud native 5G Core enables some NFs, such 
as the UPF, to be deployed closer to the user for latency-sensitive applications. In the 
picture on the right, the different slices (corresponding to different applications and 
QoS) are represented by the different colours all along the different network entities. 
XXXX
Prioritisation rules is another key technological factor for SATCOM
Prioritisation rules have been defined by different telecom standards (e.g.: 3GPP 5G group). The core network makes it possible to define network slices within the communication channel. 
Network slicing is the ability to change the QoS (latency, throughput) or different communication traffics in limited bandwidth communication channels. 
Traffic prioritisation rules for ground segment
CN
instance
End-to-end network slices
Edge site Regional site National site
RAN Transport
Cloud native
applications
Cloud native
applications
Cloud native
applications
Transport
path
WAN WAN
Transport
path
RAN
partition
RAN
partition
RAN
partition
VPN
Slice A
Slice B
Slice C
Slice D
Slice A QoS 1
QoS 2
QoS 3
QoS 4
QoS 5
Slice B
Slice C
Slice D
VPN
VPN
5G Core
Ericsson Radio System Ericsson Radio System 
– Mobile Transport Ericsson Cloud Core
Network controller
(e.g. National or Regional)
Optimized for Handheld
Devices
Optimized for Interinstitutional
communications
Optimized for Transport
QoS
QoS
QoS
Network slicing examples
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 102
KEY TECHNOLOGICAL FACTORS ENABLING FUTURE SECURE SATCOM SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
Inter-satellite links (ISLs) establish high-speed communication channels between satellites, 
typically through optical or RF technology, enabling data routing between adjacent satellites 
and creating a large mesh network that communicates with ground stations. It is not believed 
that ISL will have a  direct impact on user terminals per se but more on gateways and 
overall communication latency. ISL are used to create high-speed communication channels 
(traditionally optical but it can also be RF) between satellites. In addition to communicating 
with the users’ terminal in its footprint, each satellite also maintains contact with two to 
four adjacent satellites using the ISL and routes data between them to create a large mesh 
network communicating with ground stations. 
In general, optical ISL goes in pair with OBPs (on-board processing) to route traffic on the 
right spacecraft optical head (North, South, East, West). ISL improves/accelerates data 
uplink/downlink and reduces the footprint of the ground segment (IRIDIUM constellation 
only operates four gateways but has a global coverage). To date, some examples of ISL 
systems are Iridium’s constellation or NASA’s GEO TDRS (Tracking and Data Relay 
Satellite). The TDRS will keep a continuous communication link with the ISS (International 
Space Station).
Because of ISL, station-to-station data exchange from one user terminal to another can 
be routed directly through space without going through a  ground station improving the 
exchange’s security. Intersatellite links have existed for a  couple of decades and several 
systems have been put in place around the world (the TDRS and EDRS (European Data 
Relay Satellite System) optical for instance but not only). Inmarsat also offers a low-cost RF 
intersatellite link service with a more modest throughput. EDRS is a ISL service which can 
be used to connect with other ISL enabled satellites in LEO for instance. It is used by the 
Copernicus satellites and Airbus offers it also as a commercial service.
ISL technology will likely become ubiquitous, especially amongst NGSO systems, as the 
technology matures and cost decreases. It will enable a decrease in the amount of gateway 
infrastructure to be deployed and thus help reducing the CAPEX cost of those NGSO 
systems and in turn help reducing capacity cost €/Mbps/month (the CAPEX ISL cost saving 
must be offset by the CAPEX gateway saving). 
Laser communication, data relay, inter-satellite links
Constellation with/without ISLs representation
Examples of Optical ISL manufacturers and products
Product Examples of application
TESAT
LCTI35 GEO SATCOM data relay
Smart LCT70 Earth observation LEO satellites connected 
to GEOs in data relay scheme
SCOT80 LEO Broadband constellation data relay
Cube LCT CubeSat LEO data relay
Mynaric
Condor Mk2 LEO constellation (ex: compatible with SDA 
tranche 0) data relay
Condor Mk3 Evolution of CONDOR Mk1
Thales Alenia 
Space/ RUAG
OPTEL-C, OPTEL-µ Data relay
No gateway
in line of 
sight = no 
service
ISL
Constellation using ISL
Constellation without ISL
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 103
KEY TECHNOLOGICAL FACTORS ENABLING FUTURE SECURE SATCOM SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
Roaming and Inter-satellite links
XXXX
Intersatellite link and roaming, key technological factors for 
SATCOM
ISL technology is maturing, and European players are very active in this sector with at least 
3 European suppliers (Mynaric, Tesat, Thales) while production costs continue to decrease 
thanks to mass production for the upcoming NGSO constellations. Each supplier generally 
offers several products depending on the link distance and characteristics (either LEO-toLEO or LEO-to-ground or LEO-to-GEO, etc.), see previous page. The optical ISL generally 
implies the use of an onboard processing system (OBP), i.e. to decode packets on-board and 
direct packets to the right ISL head, etc. 
XXXX
Two main challenges for Inter-satellite links
1. Intersatellite links bottleneck: Even if Intersatellite Links can be seen from a network 
point of view as simple ethernet cable, their implementation in space is far more expensive 
for optical units. All traffic from all linked satellites not in range of a gateway must pass 
through the satellite that does have gateway coverage. This creates a  bottleneck, 
requiring very tight resource planning and allocation. When a satellite supplies traffic 
to a high-density area without being in visibility of a gateway, the traffic can only be 
supplied itself by the ISLs. The congestion effect is illustrated on the figure on the right 
and is amplified by two factors: number of ISL hops required to reach a Ground Station 
and capacity served by adjacent satellites/Number of high-density areas served by 
adjacent satellites. Hence, ISL is required for spatial mesh but will add DC/mass/cost/
network constraints that have to be accounted at the earliest phase of the system design.
2. Roaming aspects: Roaming, including all handovers aspects, is a critical topic in satellite 
constellations as it must be seamless for the user. The figure on the right illustrates 
a typical roaming scenario. In step A, the UT is served by satellite 1, which is currently 
connected to gateway A, and in turn to Point of Presence (POP) P via ground fiber. In 
step B, a few seconds later, the satellite has moved closer to gateway B, and roams onto 
it. The UT’s context must be switched from gateway a to gateway B but maintaining the 
satellite and POP assignments in the network path topology. In step C, a few seconds 
later, the UT roams from satellite 1 to satellite 2, as it is in a better position. The various handovers (inter/intra satellite) can be done in “break before make” (link 
interruption, need to create the next link in few tens of ms) or “make before break” mode 
(Next link prepared in advance). 
ISL congestion effect illustration
Roaming scenario illustration
Gateway
Gateway
XX Gbps
Directly feed
by the Gateway
1 hop required
XX Gbps
Directly feed
by the Gateway
10Gbps
5Gbps
7.5Gbps 7.5Gbps 2.5Gbps 2.5Gbps
10Gbps 10Gbps 10Gbps
1 hop required
2 hops required
1 hop required
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 104
CYBERSECURITY SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
Cybersecurity principles and factors influencing secure SATCOM
Cybersecurity concerns the capability to prevent, protect from, detect and mitigate 
unauthorised access and/or criminal use as well as investigation of cyber incidents related 
to computers, electronic communications systems, electronic communications services, wire 
communications, and electronic communications , including information contained therein. 
The ultimate objective of Cybersecurity is to ensure Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability 
(CIA). The security requirements for different systems may vary, but they usually include 
the basic triad of CIA. In addition, some systems may also require authentication, nonrepudiation and access control to ensure the security of the data and the users.
In addition, different mission types may require different level of assurance of operation 
for each security service. For example, high-security missions will require many security 
services and the highest assurance that those services are operating as intended (e.g., 
use of high grade, government-approved cryptographic algorithms). Moderate security 
missions may require the same security services as high security missions, but with lower 
levels of assurance. Minimal security missions will require the fewest security services, and 
the lowest levels of assurance.
When implementing cybersecurity on a  space mission, satellite manufacturers are 
constrained by a number of factors, whether internal or external, making the implementation 
of cybersecurity more or less robust. First, the type of mission, whether commercial, 
governmental or defence-related may influence its cybersecurity level. Defence and 
governmental missions usually comply with the highest security requirements. On the other 
end, commercial missions due to financial or time-to-market reasons, and sometimes due 
to lower awareness or maturity regarding cybersecurity, may not set significant efforts on 
cybersecurity implementation. In any case, implementation of cybersecurity represents 
a  technical tradeoff as it may have significant impacts on the overall size, weight, and 
necessary power (SWaP) of the satellite. External factors such as the evolution of the threat 
level, or the current level of recommendations issued by the industry may also be strong 
incentives to improve the global cybersecurity level of space-related systems. 
It is noteworthy to mention that ground and user segment (not only space segment) design 
are also impacted by cybersecurity requirements.
Factors impacting the cybersecurity level of a space system 
from a satellite manufacturing perspective
Maturity
Security Cost
Time to Market
SWaP Compromise
Internal Factors
Industry 
Recommendations
Regulatory Level
Threat Level
Type of Mission
(Gvt/Commercial/Military)
External Factors
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 105
CYBERSECURITY SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
Cybersecurity is key in increasingly contested scenarios
XXXX
Cybersecurity landscape overview
In recent years, the importance of cybersecurity in the space industry has significantly increased due to various factors. This shift in focus has been prompted not only by the industry 
stakeholders, researchers, and military entities but also by the malevolent activities of ransomware and criminal groups. Understanding how to protect and exploit space infrastructure has 
become crucial for all these parties involved. Traditionally, satellites have relied on "security through obscurity," leveraging system complexity and high equipment costs to deter adversaries. 
However, the landscape has evolved due to the widespread use of space assets in our daily lives, the adoption of off-the-shelf hardware and software components, the growing number of 
space assets, and other trends within the New Space domain. These developments have significantly expanded the potential attack surface, increasing the need for robust cybersecurity 
measures. 
Alongside this expanding playground for cyber attackers, the complexity and connectivity of space systems have also risen, amplifying the risk level and the challenges associated with 
protecting space-related infrastructure. The taxonomy of threat actors can be divided into different broad categories ranging from state-sponsored military groups which are approaching 
cyberspace as a new battlefield with its geopolitical implications, to individual hackers or insiders looking for their own interest or local disruption. In the last 3 years, national security 
agencies have particularly highlighted the significant development of ransomware activities which had an operational and financial impact on all the major industries. Ransomware groups 
revenues are estimated to be over $1.5Tn per year which offers these criminal actors the opportunity to professionalise their service (through affiliate or partnership programmes) and to 
improve their products (with better encryption rate or exfiltration speed). Many attacks on the aerospace industry didn’t have any direct financial interest and were mainly done to steal 
intellectual property or spy on sensitive activities and information. These attacks are usually perpetrated by actors with substantial financial means and are often state-sponsored. Even 
if a specific focus is made here on ransomware, the attacks on the aerospace industry may also involve and imply other types of malwares and are also driven by different motivations 
beyond direct financial gain. It is important to recognise that the increasing attention towards cybersecurity in the space industry is not merely a result of industry interest but a response to 
a changing landscape guided by governmental directives and policies. An example of such initiatives is the EU Space Strategy for Security and Defence, which plays a significant role in 
shaping the approach to space cybersecurity. By acknowledging and addressing these challenges, the space industry and relevant stakeholders can work together to enhance the security 
and resilience of space infrastructure in the face of evolving cyber threats.
XXXX
Main objectives of EU Space Strategy for Security and Defence
In the current geopolitical landscape, marked by escalating power competition and an intensification of threats faced by the European Union (EU) and its Member States, space has emerged 
as a strategic domain of paramount importance. Recognizing this, EU leaders have outlined the significance of space in the Strategic Compass and have called for the formulation of an EU 
Space Strategy for Security and Defence. The EU is taking proactive measures to safeguard its interests, deter hostile activities in space, and bolster its strategic position and autonomy. 
The European Union Space Strategy for Security and Defence is designed to achieve several key objectives(1):
• Enhancing Resilience and Protection of Space Systems and Services.
• Responding to Space Threats and Strengthening the EU Space Threat Response Architecture.
• Enhancing the use of EU Space capabilities for Security and Defence.
• Partnering for responsible behaviors in outer space.
By doing so, the EU aims to ensure its resilience, strengthen its capacity to address emerging threats, and assert its autonomy in space affairs.
(1) European Commission, 2022: EU Space Strategy for Security and Defence
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 106
CYBERSECURITY SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
Actual cyberattacks and potential scenarios
XXXX
Actual cyberattacks and potential scenarios
Research in the domain of space cybersecurity usually defines three broad categories of attack surfaces: those relating to satellite signals, those relating to space platforms, and 
those targeting satellite ground systems. Providing a detailed description of cyberattacks is out of scope for the present report. However, public information exists which either refers to 
cyberattacks belonging to the public domain or to cyberattacks that have been declassified after an extended period of time. 
Scenarios of cyberattacks are either built from actual empirical cases of cyberattacks for which detailed information is available or by a scenario-oriented approach based on common risk 
assessment methodologies, such as the NIST SP 800-30 or the ISO 27005:2011. This table of cyberattacks demonstrates various levels of sophistication for a flaw to be exploited. Threats 
targeting the satellite payload generally require very sophisticated attack scenarios and are not within reach of any type of threat actor. There are only very few cases of actual examples of 
a cyberattack on the satellite payload as it usually requires a complex and early supply chain compromise with significant technical resources and knowledge.
On the other side, many cyberattacks are documented which target the satellite signal such as jamming, signal injection, or eavesdropping type of attacks. Such attacks are particularly 
hostile as they don’t necessarily require important financial means and the required level of sophistication is moderate to low. Attacks to the ground infrastructure have significant 
commonalities with the attacks targeting more common IT network infrastructure. 
Overview of threat actors and their motivations
very high Sophistication / Organizational / Financial means low
• State sponsored attacker
• Military
• Intelligence
• Private organization
• Commercial competitors
• Part suppliers
• Political Hacktivist • Script kiddie
• Individual 
 hacker
• Professional criminal
• Ransomware groups
• Organized crime
• Cybersecurity 
 researcher
Espionage, 
defensive and 
offensive 
actions, 
system takeover, 
space control, 
sabotage
Disruption, 
creation of panic 
situation, ideological attack, counter 
intelligence, 
technology theft 
ransom
Technology theft, 
espionage, unfair 
competition
Technical demonstration, bug 
bounty, vulnerability, research, 
notoriety
Takeover defacement, community 
spirit, technical 
challenge, message 
broadcast
Theft of information, manipulation 
for personal 
interest, vengeance
Disruption, 
personal interest
• Insider threat
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 107
CYBERSECURITY SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
Actual cyberattacks and potential scenarios (continued)
XXXX
Evolution of Cyberattacks on Space-Based Systems 
(then applicable to SATCOM)
Cyberattacks against satellite systems have been occurring for decades perpetrated 
by attackers from across the globe. In the early days, from 1980 to 1989, the principal 
information security concerns revolved around the ability of adversaries to compromise 
satellite flight control signals. However, military satellites were presumed secure due to 
the complexity of the requisite equipment. The main concern was on commercial missions, 
especially during the Cold War, where jamming and replay attacks have been a concern 
between American and Soviet adversaries. The first major satellite hacking incidents are 
generally thought to have occurred in the 1980s with cases of hijacking of television shows 
in the U.S., cases of eavesdropping against satellite imagery services, and attacks against 
ground station networks. The acceleration of satellite usage in the 1990s saw a rise in cases 
of jamming attack perpetuated by states to control flows of information. This period also saw 
the emergence of cryptographic systems against satellite television piracy. The 1990s also 
saw high profile incidents where hackers claimed to have accessed systems which could 
allow the issuance of flight control commands to orbiting satellites (intrusion in NASA’s 
Goddard Space Flight Center and ROSAT satellite alteration).
From the 2000s, one major trend was the emergence of organized non-state attackers. 
Significant attacks against ground stations during this period include a  complete flight 
control takeover of two NASA satellites in 2007 and 2008. The 2000s also saw the first 
public case of malware infection in orbit. Since 2010, a wave of jamming incidents in the 
Middle East and North Africa was kicked off by the Arab Spring protest movements. Attacks 
against ground stations and satellite control systems grew more sophisticated as well, with 
many being linked to state actors. Commercial ground systems were also demonstrated 
to have severe vulnerabilities, including many hard-coded passwords and backdoors. 
New attention has recently been paid to the satellite cybersecurity field with the U.S.A.F. 
(U.S. Air Force) launching the Hack-a-Sat challenge inviting teams of hackers to uncover 
vulnerabilities on real space systems.
Examples of cyberattacks include eavesdropping (interception, delete or modification of 
transmitted data ), signal interference (addition of same type of signals as the ones used by 
the satellite, leading to a partial or total loss of the signal), spoofing (intentional interference, 
usually nefarious form of interference done using fake satellite signals), jamming (use of 
white noise leading to a partial or total loss of the signal) and network intrusion (unauthorized 
penetration of enterprise network or an individual machine).
Evolution of cyberattacks on Space Systems 
(number of attacks /year over the last fourty years)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
1980–1989
Payload
1990–1999 2000–2009 2010–2019
Ground station Signal
Source: James Pavur, Securing new space: on satellite cyber-security - ORA - Oxford University Research Archive
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 108
CYBERSECURITY SECURE SATCOM TECHNOLOGY
Actual cyberattacks and potential mitigation actions examples
The graph on the left illustrates a  nonexhaustive list of possible countermeasures 
that can mitigate vulnerabilities associated 
to threat scenarios at various levels (Space, 
Link, Ground, User and Supply Chain). It 
also highlights that all the segments are 
vulnerable to cyberattacks but in a different 
manner. Consequently, each one has to be 
protected specifically. It matters to protect 
all the segments, as any vulnerability in the 
transmission chain can be exploited.
Software & COTS update
Potential mitigation action 
(non exhaustive)
Tunneling, sequence number, token
Pushing end-user update
Virtualisation, segregation, container
Strong encryption algorithm
Information campaign
Rerouting, filtering, firewalling, ACL 
(Access Control List)
Patch, software update
Awareness training, risk assessment
Strong authentification
Antivirus baseline update
IDS (Intrusion Detection System)
Geo-localization, alternative sources
Staff training, prevention, awareness
Account management
Backup, encryption
Zero-day exploitation
Threat scenario
Signal replay
Endpoint compromise/takeover
Shared resources starvation
Eavesdropping
Phishing campaign
DDOS (Distributed Denial of Service) 
attack
Malware infection
APT (Advanced Persistent Threat)
Maneuvering take control
Virus, trojan
Supply chain attack
Jamming/Spoofing signals
Social engineering
Insider threat
Cryptolocker
Threat actor by likelihood of 
targeting a space system 
State sponsored attacker
APT (Advanced Persistent 
Threat)Ransomware groups
Insider
Hacktivists, others
Segments
Space 
segment
Link 
segment
Ground 
segment
Supply chain 
segment
User 
segment
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 109
LIST OF ACRONYMS ANNEXES
Annex 1: List of acronyms
3GPP 3RD GENERATION PARTNERSHIP PROJECT
ACL ACCESS CONTROL LIST
ADS-B AUTOMATIC DEPENDENT SURVEILLANCE-BROADCAST
AEHF ADVANCED EXTREME HIGH FREQUENCY SATELLITE
AI ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AIS AUTOMATIC IDENTIFICATION SYSTEM
AOCS ATTITUDE & ORBIT DETERMINATION & CONTROL SYSTEM
API APPLICATION PROGRAMMING INTERFACE
APT ADVANCED PERSISTENT THREAT
ARPU AVERAGE REVENUE PER USER
ASBM ARCTIC SATELLITE BROADBAND MISSION
ATM AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
B2B BUSINESS TO BUSINESS 
BGAN BROADBAND GLOBAL AREA NETWORK
BSS BROADCAST SATELLITE SERVICE
BTS BASE TRANSCEIVER STATION
C2 COMMAND & CONTROL
C3S COPERNICUS CLIMATE CHANGE SERVICE
CAGR COMPOUND ANNUAL GROWTH RATE
CAMS COPERNICUS ATMOSPHERE MANAGEMENT SERVICE
CAPEX CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
CEMS COPERNICUS EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SERVICE
CEPOL EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAINING
CHIME COPERNICUS HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGING MISSION
CIA CONFIDENTIALITY, INTEGRITY AND AVAILABILITY
CIMR COPERNICUS IMAGING MICROWAVE RADIOMETER
CIR COMMITTED INFORMATION RATE
CLMS COPERNICUS LAND MONITORING SYSTEM
CMEMS COPERNICUS MARINE ENVIRONMENT MONITORING SERVICE
CO2M COPERNICUS ANTHROPOGENIC CARBON DIOXIDE MONITORING
COMSATCOM COMMERCIAL SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS
COTM COMMUNICATIONS ON THE MOVE
COTS COMMERCIAL OFF THE SHELF
COTP COMMUNICATIONS ON THE PAUSE
CPF CENTRAL PROCESSING FACILITY
CRISTAL COPERNICUS POLAR ICE AND SNOW TOPOGRAPHY ALTIMETER
CSDP COMMON SECURITY AND DEFENSE POLICY
DDOS DISTRIBUTED DENIAL OF SERVICE
D2D DIRECT TO DEVICE
DGA DÉLÉGATION GÉNÉRALE DE L'ARMEMENT
DG DEFIS DIRECTORATE GENERAL FOR DEFENCE INDUSTRY AND SPACE
DLR DEUTSCHES ZENTRUM FÜR LUFT- UND RAUMFAHRT
DOD DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE
DSC DIGITAL SELECTIVE CALLING
DTE DIRECT-TO-EARTH
EC EUROPEAN COMMISION
ECHO EUROPEAN CIVIL PROTECTION AND HUMANITARIAN AID 
OPERATIONS
ECMWF EUROPEAN CENTRE FOR MEDIUM-RANGE WEATHER FORECAST 
EDA EUROPEAN DEFENCE AGENCY
EDRS EUROPEAN DATA RELAY SYSTEM
EEA EUROPEAN ENVIRONMENT AGENCY 
EEAS EU EXTERNAL ACTION SERVICE
EFCA EUROPEAN FISHERIES CONTROL AGENCY
EGNOS EUROPEAN GLOBAL NAVIGATION OVERLAY SYSTEM
EHF EXTREMELY HIGH FREQUENCY
EMEA EUROPE, MIDDLE EAST AND AFRICA
EMPACT EUROPEAN MULTIDISCIPLINARY PLATFORM AGAINST CRIMINAL 
THREAT
EMSA EUROPEAN MARITIME SAFETY AGENCY
EO EARTH OBSERVATION
EOL END-OF-LIFE
EPIRB EMERGENCY POSITION INCLUDING RADIO EACON
ERA EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR RAILWAYS
ERCC EMERGENCY RESPONSE COORDINATION CENTRE
ESA ELECTRONICALLY STEERED ANTENNA
ESA EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 110
LIST OF ACRONYMS ANNEXES
Annex 1: List of acronyms (continued)
ESS EVOLVED STRATEGIC SATELLITE
ESSP EUROPEAN SATELLITE SERVICES PROVIDER
EU EUROPEAN UNION
EU NAVFOR EU NAVAL FORCES
EU RDC EU RAPID DEPLOYMENT CAPACITY
EU SST EU SPACE SURVEILLANCE AND TRACKING
EU-LISA EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR THE OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT 
OF LARGE-SCALE IT SYSTEMS IN THE AREA OF FREEDOM, SECURITY 
AND JUSTICE
EUCPM EUROPEAN UNION CIVIL PROTECTION MECHANISM
EUROCONTROL EUROPEAN ORGANISATION FOR THE SAFETY OF AIR NAVIGATION 
EUROJUST EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR CRIMINAL JUSTICE COOPERATION
EUROPOL EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT 
COOPERATION
EUSPA EUROPEAN UNION AGENCY FOR THE SPACE PROGRAMME
FCC FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION
FPA FLAT PANEL ANTENNA
FPGA FIELD PROGRAMMABLE GATE ARRAYS
FRONTEX EUROPEAN BORDER AND COAST GUARD AGENCY
FSS FIXED SATELLITE SERVICE
GB GIBABYTE
GBPS GIGABITS PER SECOND
GDP GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT
GEO GEOSTATIONARY EARTH ORBIT
GHSL GLOBAL HUMAN SETTLEMENT LAYER
GMDSS GLOBAL MARITIME DISTRESS AND SAFETY SYSTEM
GMS GALILEO MISSION SEGMENT
GNSS GLOBAL NAVIGATION SATELLITE SYSTEM
GOVSATCOM GOVERNMENT SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS
GPS GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM
GSMC GALILEO SECURITY MONITORING CENTRE
GSO GEOSTATIONARY
GSS GALILEO SENSOR STATION
HALE HIGH ALTITUDE LONG ENDURANCE
HQ HEADQUARTERS
HTS HIGH THROUGHPUT SATELLITE
HW HARDWARE
HEO HIGHLY ELLIPTICAL ORBIT
IDS INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM
IMSO INTERNATIONAL MOBILE SATELLITE ORGANISATION
IOT INTERNET OF THINGS
IRIS2 INFRASTRUCTURE FOR RESILIENCE, INTERCONNECTION AND 
SECURITY BY SATELLITES
ISL INTER SATELLITES LINK
ISO INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION FOR STANDARDISATION
ISS INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION
ISR INTELLIGENCE, SURVEILLANCE AND RECONNAISSANCE
IT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
ITU INTERNATIONAL TELECOMMUNICATION UNION
KPH KILOMETRES PER HOUR
KPP KEY PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS
LEO LOW EARTH ORBIT
LNA LOW NOISE AMPLIFIER
LPV LOCALISER PERFORMANCE WITH VERTICAL GUIDANCE
LRIT LONG RANGE IDENTIFICATION AND TRACKING
LSTM COPERNICUS LAND SURFACE TEMPERATURE MONITORING
MALE MEDIUM ALTITUDE LONG ENDURANCE
M&C MONITORING & CONTROL
MBPS MEGABITS PER SECOND
MCC MISSION CONTROL CENTRES
MEA MIDDLE EAST AND AFRICA
MEO MEDIUM EARTH ORBIT
MFF MULTIANNUAL FINANCIAL FRAMEWORK
MILSATCOM MILITARY SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS
MLI MULTI-LAYER INSULATORS
MOD MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
MRCC MARITIME RESCUE COORDINATION CENTRE
MSCHOA MARITIME SECURITY CENTRE – HORN OF AFRICA
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 111
Annex 1: List of acronyms (continued)
MSS MOBILE SATELLITE SERVICE
NATO NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANISATION
NF NETWORK FUNCTION
NFV NETWORK FUNCTION VIRTUALISATION
NGO NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATION
NGSO NON-GEOSTATIONARY SATELLITE ORBIT
NLES NAVIGATION LAND EARTH STATION
NOC NETWORK OPERATIONS CENTER
NTN NON-TERRESTRIAL NETWORK
OBP ON-BOARD PROCESSING
OGS OPTICAL GROUND STATIONS
OISL OPTICAL INTER SATELLITES LINK
OLAF EUROPEAN ANTI-FRAUD OFFICE
OSR OPTICAL SOLAR REFLECTOR 
PFI PRIVATE FINANCE INITIATIVE
POP POINT OF PRESENCE
PRS PUBLIC REGULATED SERVICE
QKD QUANTUM KEY DISTRIBUTION
QOS QUALITY OF SERVICE
RDC RAPID DEPLOYMENT CAPABILITY
RF RADIO FREQUENCY
RIMS RANGING & INTEGRITY MONITORING STATIONS
R&I RESEARCH AND INNOVATION
RPAS REMOTELY PILOTED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS 
ROSE-L COPERNICUS L-BAND SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR
SAR SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR
SATCEN EUROPEAN CENTRE FOR MEDIUM-RANGE WEATHER FORECAST
SBAS SATELLITE-BASED AUGMENTATION SYSTEM
SDN SOFTWARE DEFINED NETWORK
SDR SOFTWARE DEFINED RADIO
SDO STANDARD DEVELOPING ORGANISATION
SD-WAN SOFTWARE-DEFINED WIDE AREA NETWORK
SLA SERVICE LEVEL AGREEMENT
SME SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED ENTERPRISE
SNO SATELLITE NETWORK OPERATORS
SOC SPACE OPERATIONS CENTER
SOL SAFETY OF LIFE
SRM SATELLITE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
SSA SPACE SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
SSAS SHIP SECURITY ALERT SYSTEM
SSRS SHIP SECURITY REPORTING SYSTEM
SST SPACE SURVEILLANCE AND TRACKING
STM SPACE TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
SW SOFTWARE
SWAP SIZE WEIGHT AND POWER
TCR TELEMETRY, COMMAND AND RANGING
TDRS TRACKING AND DATA RELAY SATELLITE
TETRA TRANS-EUROPEAN TRUNK RADIO TPE TRANSPONDER 
EQUIVALENT
TT&C TELEMETRY TRACKING AND COMMAND
UAV UNMANNED AERIAL VEHICLE
UHF ULTRA-HIGH FREQUENCY
UKMTO U.K. MARITIME TRADE OPERATIONS
UPF USER-PLANE FUNCTION
UN UNITED NATIONS
UNHCR UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES
US UNITED STATES
UT USER TERMINAL
USAF U.S. AIR FORCE
USSR UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
VHF VERY HIGH FREQUENCY
VHTS VERY HIGH THROUGHPUT SATELLITES/SYSTEMS
VLEO VERY LOW EARTH ORBIT
VM VIRTUAL MACHINE
VMS VESSEL MONITORING SYSTEM
VNF VIRTUAL NETWORK FUNCTION
VSAT VERY SMALL APERTURE TERMINAL
WASH WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE
WGS WIDEBAND GLOBAL SATCOM
LIST OF ACRONYMS ANNEXES
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 112
KEY TERMS ANNEXES
Annex 2: Key terms
ACL 
(Access Control List)
An access control list (ACL) is a list of rules that specifies which users or systems are granted or denied access to a particular object or system 
resource. Access control lists are also installed in routers or switches, where they act as filters, managing which traffic can access the network. 
Access control lists are used for controlling permissions to a computer system or computer network. They are used to filter traffic in and out of 
a specific device.
APT (Advanced 
Persistent Threat)
An advanced persistent threat (APT) is a sophisticated, sustained cyberattack in which an intruder establishes an undetected presence in a network 
in order to steal sensitive data over a prolonged period of time.
Capacity demand 
This refers to the satellite capacity that a customer contracts to a satellite operator/service provider for SATCOM needs. In certain cases, customers 
may acquire a large capacity that will not be directly used. This typically occurs when certain customers lease entire satellite payloads. 
Capacity demand can be of two type: FSS (Fixed Satellite Services) and MSS (Mobile Satellite Services).
Capacity supply This refers to the satellite capacity that satellite operators provide via their satellite assets. Such satellite capacity can be provided to end-users 
directly by satellite operators or via service providers.
COMSATCOM
COMSATCOM refers to SATCOM capacity and service provided on the global open market, generally with a degree of ‘on-demand’ access. These 
services encompass a wide range of sectors, including telecommunications, broadcasting, internet access, maritime communication, aviation, and 
more. COMSATCOM systems contribute to global connectivity and information dissemination.
DDOS (Distributed 
Denial Of Service)
DDoS stands for Distributed Denial of Service, and it's a method where cybercriminals flood a network with so much malicious traffic that it cannot 
operate or communicate as it normally would. This causes the site's normal traffic, also known as legitimate packets, to come to a halt.
GOVSATCOM
GOVSATCOM encompasses the communication services specifically tailored to meet the needs of governmental entities, as defined in the Working 
document of the European External Action Service of 15/03/2017(1). This involves the deployment of satellite communication systems to ensure reliable, 
secure, and resilient communication for government operations, including defence, emergency response, public safety, and diplomatic communication.
GOVSATCOM are highly assured SATCOM offering a  certain robust security level with some resilience. GOVSATCOM systems are generally 
considered less protected than MILSATCOM systems but offer a higher degree of protection with respect to COMSATCOM systems.
HTS (High Throughput 
Satellite) capacity
This term refers to capacity transmitted through the latest generation of satellite payloads. Coverage from HTS payloads includes a multiplicity of 
small beams, which allow some of the frequencies to be reused in different spot beams, resulting in a larger volume of capacity that is sellable to 
customers. Volumes can significantly vary based on the network architecture.
IDS (Intrusion 
Detection System)
An Intrusion Detection System (IDS) is a monitoring system that detects suspicious activities and generates alerts when they are detected. Based 
upon these alerts, dedicated staff can investigate the issue and take the appropriate actions to remediate the threat.
(1) Council of the European Union. 2017. Cover Note: High Level Civil Military User Needs for Governmental Satellite Communications, March 22nd.
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 113
KEY TERMS ANNEXES
Annex 2: Key terms (continued)
MILSATCOM
MILSATCOM is a highly protected and guaranteed SATCOM, generally provided by military systems, offering highly assured and protected satellite 
communication capacity both in terms of nuclear hardening, anti-jamming/dazzle capacity and highly secure Telemetry, Tracking, and Command 
(TT&C), supplemented by an equally robust and resilient ground segment. The security and technology are highly specific and largely sovereign in 
nature. Those MILSATCOM systems are primarily designed for military purposes and are under national control.
Narrowband
Narrowband refers to telecommunications applications and services that utilise a narrower set (around 100 Khz) or band of frequencies in the 
communication channel. These utilise the channel frequency that is considered flat or which will use a lesser number of frequency sets. Traditionally, 
narrowband telecommunications applications and services uses UHF, S-band and L-band, but can also use other frequency bands.
Phishing
Phishing is a common type of cyber attack that targets individuals through email, text messages, phone calls, and other forms of communication. 
a  phishing attack aims to trick the recipient into falling for the attacker’s desired action, such as revealing financial information, system login 
credentials, or other sensitive information.
Regular capacity
This term refers to capacity supply through satellite payloads with a largely classical design—that is, with coverage usually including at least a full 
country and up to a full region (wide beam). The bulk of the regular capacity is in the C- and Ku-band frequencies, with an increasing presence of 
Ka-band capacity. Typical regular payloads have a capacity of up to 1,260 MHz (approximately 35 TPEs (TransPonder Equivalents)).
Secure SATCOM
Secure SATCOM is defined as satellite-based, one or two-way communication capacity/service that is able to provide reliable, accessible and 
guaranteed satellite capacity/service for communications. 
Secure SATCOM can be provided with any type of frequency band by GOVSATCOM, COMSATCOM, MILSATCOM.
Transponder The term ‘transponder’ in this document refers to a normalised capacity of 36 MHz, unless otherwise specified.
Use case
In the frame of the EUSPA Secure Satcom Market and Technology report, a use case describes how the actors of the value chain would use secure 
SATCOM to achieve specific goals and/or tasks. The description of use cases also include the trends which could affect the use of secure SATCOM 
(for those actors) in the future.
User demand User demand is similar to capacity demand (cf. page 112).
Specially, the user demand can be of two type: FSS (Fixed Satellite Services) and MSS (Mobile Satellite Services).
EUSPA Secure SATCOM Market and User Technology Report | ISSUE 1, 2023 114
XXXX
European Commission
European Commission (EC) and more specifically 
the Directorate General for Defence Industry and Space (DG 
DEFIS) has overall responsibility for the  implementation 
of  the  Union Space Programme and its components 
(Galileo, EGNOS, Copernicus, GOVSATCOM and SSA). 
This includes: 
• Overseeing the implementation of all activities related to the programme;
• Defining its priorities and long-term evolution; 
• Managing the funds allocated to the programme; 
• Ensuring a  clear division of responsibilities and tasks, in particular between the  EU 
Agency for the Space Programme and the European Space Agency; 
• Ensuring proper reporting on the  programme to the  Member States of  the  EU, 
the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union. 
DG DEFIS further contributes to shaping the  EU space policy and fostering a  strong, 
innovative and resilient EU space ecosystem. It supports the emergence of New Space in 
the EU, including SMEs and new entrants, fosters entrepreneurship and access to finance, 
and contributes to the growth of the EU space industry. 
DG DEFIS promotes EU space research fostering a cost-effective, competitive and innovative 
space industry and research community. It ensures that space technology, services and 
applications meet EU policy needs, and the R&I needs of the EU Space Programme. It also 
ensures that the EU can access and use space with a high level of autonomy. 
The EU space policy addresses some of the most pressing challenges facing the EU today, 
such as fighting climate change, supporting EU’s priorities, whilst strongly contributing to 
the green and digital transitions and to the resilience of the Union.
XXXX
European Union Agency for the Space Programme
EUSPA is the operational European Union Agency for the 
Space Programme. It adopts a user-oriented approach 
to promote sustainable growth and improve the security 
and safety of the European Union. EUSPA’s mission 
revolves around three core principles: service provision, 
market growth, and security. 
The EU Agency for the Space Programme:
• Provides state-of-the-art, safe and secure positioning, navigation and timing services 
based on Galileo and EGNOS, cost-effective satellite communications services for 
GOVSATCOM and soon IRIS2, and Front Desk services of the EU Space Surveillance 
Tracking whilst ensuring the systems’ service continuity and robustness;
• Promotes and maximises the use of data and services offered by Galileo, EGNOS, 
Copernicus, GOVSATCOM and soon IRIS2 across a broad range of domains.
• Fosters the development of a vibrant European space ecosystem by providing market 
intelligence, and technical know-how to innovators, academia, start-ups, and SMEs. 
The agency leverages Horizon Europe, other EU funding, and innovative procurement 
mechanisms.
• Implements and monitors the security of the EU Space Programme components in space 
and on the ground with the aim to enhance the security of the Union and its Member 
States; EUSPA operates the Galileo Service Monitoring Centre.
• The Security Accreditation Board established within the Agency is the security 
accreditation authority for all of the Programme’s components, where Member States 
take accreditation decisions in a strictly independent manner from the Programme.
About the authors
The authors would like to convey special thanks to the contributors to this report:
• Euroconsult
• VVA
• FDC
© 2023 European Union Space Agency for the Space Program
Copyright note: This information can be republished without charge provided the EU Agency 
for the Space Programme (EUSPA) is acknowledged. If you do republish, we would be grateful 
if you link back to the EUSPA website (www.euspa.europa.eu)
ISBN: 978-92-9206-076-3
TS-03-23-438-EN-N
EUSPA Mission Statement 
The mission of the European Union Agency for the Space Programme (EUSPA) is defined by the EU Space Programme Regulation. EUSPA’s mission is to be the user-oriented operational Agency of the EU 
Space Programme, contributing to sustainable growth, security and safety of the European Union.
The EU Agency for the Space Programme:
• Provides state-of-the-art, safe and secure positioning, navigation and timing services based on Galileo and EGNOS, cost-effective satellite communications services for GOVSATCOM and soon IRIS2, 
and Front Desk services of the EU Space Surveillance Tracking whilst ensuring the systems’ service continuity and robustness;
• Promotes and maximises the use of data and services offered by Galileo, EGNOS, Copernicus, GOVSATCOM and soon IRIS2 across a broad range of domains.
• Fosters the development of a vibrant European space ecosystem by providing market intelligence, and technical know-how to innovators, academia, start-ups, and SMEs. The agency leverages Horizon 
Europe, other EU funding, and innovative procurement mechanisms.
• Implements and monitors the security of the EU Space Programme components in space and on the ground with the aim to enhance the security of the Union and its Member States; EUSPA operates 
the Galileo Service Monitoring Centre.
• The Security Accreditation Board established within the Agency is the security accreditation authority for all of the Programme’s components, where Member States take accreditation decisions in a 
strictly independent manner from the Programme.
EUSPA is “Linking Space to user needs”.
market@euspa.europa.eu
www.euspa.europa.eu
EUSPA
@space4eu
@EUSPA@social.network.europa.eu
@EU4Space
EU4Space
EUSPA
#EUSpace


